The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Radiant Shell
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Radiant Shell

Author: Paul Ernst


        
Release date: July 30, 2007 [eBook #22171]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/22171

Credits: Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RADIANT SHELL ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









The Radiant Shell

By Paul Ernst

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from "Astounding Stories"
January 1932. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]

[Illustration: _The man on the metal plate was vanishing._]


"And that, gentlemen," said the Secretary of War, "is the situation.
Arvania has stolen the Ziegler plans and formulae. With their
acquisition it becomes the most powerful nation on earth. The Ziegler
plans are at present in the Arvanian Embassy, but they will be smuggled
out of the country soon. Within a month of their landing in Arvania, war
will be declared against us. That means"--he glanced at the tense faces
around the conference table--"that we have about three months to live as
a nation--unless we can get those plans!"

There was a hushed, appalled silence, broken at last by General Forsyte.

"Nonsense! How can a postage-stamp country like Arvania really threaten
us?"

"The day has passed, General," said the Secretary, "when a nation's
power is reckoned by its size. The Ziegler heat ray is the deadliest
weapon yet invented. A thousand men with a dozen of the ray-projectors
can reduce us to smoking ruins while remaining far outside the range of
our guns. No! I tell you that declaration of war by Arvania will be
followed by the downfall of the United States inside of three months!"

Again the hushed, strained silence descended over the conference table,
while one white-faced man gazed at another and all speculated on the
incredible possibility of a world in which there was no United States of
America.

"We must get the plans," nodded Forsyte, convinced at last. "But how?
March openly on the Arvanian Embassy?"

"No, that would be declaration of war on _our_ part. The World Court,
which knows nothing of the Ziegler plans, would set the League at our
throats."

"Send volunteers unofficially to raid the place?"

"Impossible. There is a heavy guard in the Arvanian Embassy; and I more
than suspect the place bristles with machine guns."

"What _are_ we to do?" demanded Forsyte.

The Secretary seemed to have been waiting for that final question.

"I have had an odd and desperate plan submitted me from an outside
source. I could not pass it without your approval. I will let you hear
it from the lips of the planner."

He pressed a buzzer. "Bring Mr. Winter in," he told his secretary.

       *       *       *       *       *

The man who presently appeared in the doorway was an arresting figure. A
man of thirty-odd with the body of an athlete, belied somewhat by the
pallor of an indoor worker, with acid stained, delicate hands offset by
forearms that might have belonged to a blacksmith, with coal black hair
and gray eyes so light as to look like ice-gray holes in the deep
caverns of his eye-sockets. This was Thorn Winter.

"Gentlemen, the scientist, Mr. Winter," announced the Secretary. "He
thinks he can get the Ziegler plans."

Thorn Winter cleared his throat. "My scheme is simple enough," he said
tersely. "I believe I can walk right into the Embassy, get the
plans--and then walk right out again. It sounds kind of impossible, but
I think I can work it by making myself invisible."

"Invisible?" echoed Forsyte. "Invisible!"

"Precisely," said Thorn in a matter-of-fact tone. "I have just turned
out a camouflage which is the most perfect yet discovered. It was
designed for application to guns and equipment only. I'd never thought
of trying to cover a human body with it, but I am sure it can be done."

"But ... invisible ..." muttered Forsyte, glancing askance at Winter.

"There's no time for argument," said the Secretary crisply. "The
question is, shall we give this man permission to try the apparently
impossible?"

All heads nodded, though in all eyes was doubt. The Secretary turned to
the scientist.

"You are aware of the risk you run? You realize that if you are caught,
we cannot recognize you--that we must disclaim official knowledge of
your work, and leave you to your fate?"

Thorn nodded.

"Then," said the Secretary, his voice vibrant, "yours is the mission.
And on your effort hangs the fate of your country. Now--what help will
you require?"

"Only the assistance of one man," said Thorn. "And, since secrecy is
vital, I'm going to ask you, sir, to be that man."

The Secretary smiled; and with that smile he seemed to be transformed
from a great leader of affairs into a kindly, human individual. "I am
honored, Mr. Winter," he said. "Shall we go at once to your laboratory?"

       *       *       *       *       *

In the great laboratory room, the Secretary glanced about almost
uneasily at the crowding apparatus that was such an enigma to one
untrained in science. Then his gaze returned to Winter's activities.

Thorn was carefully stirring fluids, poured drop by drop from various
retorts, in a mixing bowl. All the fluids were colorless; and they
combined in a mixture that had approximately the consistency of thin
syrup. To this, Thorn added a carefully weighted pinch of glittering
powder. Then he lit a burner under the bowl, and thrust into the mixture
a tiny, specially constructed thermometer.

"You can really make yourself invisible?" breathed the Secretary.

"I can," said Thorn, "if the blisters don't upset my calculations by
making my body surfaces too moist for this stuff to stick to. I'm going
to have you paint me with it, you see, and it was never intended to
cover flesh."

He regulated the burner anxiously, and then began to take off his
clothes.

"Ready," he said at last, glancing at the thermometer and turning off
the burner. He stood before the wondering Secretary, a fine, muscular
figure. "Take this brush and cover me with the stuff. And be sure not to
miss any of me!"

And then the Secretary saw why Thorn had said the colorless paint was
never intended to be applied to human flesh. For it was still seething
and smoking in the cauldron.

"Good heavens!" he said. "Don't you want to wait till it cools a
little?"

"Can't," said Thorn. "It has to be applied hot or it loses its
flexibility."

The Secretary dipped the brush and began to paint the naked flesh of the
scientist. Not a quiver touched that flesh as an almost microscopically
thin, colorless layer formed into a film after the brush strokes. But
the Secretary's fingers shook a little.

"My God, man!" he said finally. "Doesn't it hurt?"

"It's a little like being boiled in oil," replied Thorn grimly. "Outside
of that it's all right. Hurry, before the stuff gets too cool."

       *       *       *       *       *

The clinging thin shell covered him to his chest, then to his throat. At
that point he reached into a drawer in a workbench beside him and drew
out two small, hollow hemispheres of glass. These he cupped over his
eyes.

"What are those for?" asked the Secretary.

"So my eyes can be covered with the film. If they weren't, I'd present
the somewhat remarkable spectacle of a pair of disembodied eyes walking
down the street."

Painfully, agonizingly, the hot film was applied to throat and face;
over the glass spheres that cupped around the eyes; over a tight leather
cap covering the scientist's hair; and over a sort of football
nose-guard which extended down an inch below the end of Thorn's nose in
a sort of overhanging offset that would allow him to breathe and still
keep his nostrils hidden. The Secretary stepped back.

Before him stood a figure that looked not unlike a glazed statue of a
man. The effect was that of a body encased in clear ice--and like clear
ice, the encasing shell sparkled and glittered radiantly in the sunlight
that poured in at the windows.

Thorn moved. His glazed arms and legs and torso glistened with all the
colors in the spectrum; while under the filmed bulges of glass his eyes
looked as large as apples. The Secretary felt a chill of superstitious
fear as he gazed at that weird and glittering figure with its enormous
glazed eyes.

"But you aren't invisible," he said at length.

"That comes now," said Thorn, walking ahead of the Secretary while on
the ceiling above him danced red and yellow and blue rainbows of
refracted light.

       *       *       *       *       *

He stepped onto a big metal plate. Suspended above was a huge metal
ring, with its hole directly over the spot on which he stood.

"Soft magnets," explained Thorn. "As simply as I can put it, my process
for rendering an object invisible is this: I place the object, coated
with the film, on this plate. Then I start in motion the overhead ring,
creating an immensely powerful, rapidly rotating magnetic field. The
rotating field rearranges the atoms of this peculiarly susceptible film
of mine so that they will transmit light rays with the least possible
resistance. It combs the atoms into straight lines, you might say. With
that straight-line, least-resistance arrangement comes invisibility."

"I don't quite see--" began the Secretary.

"Refraction of light," said Thorn hurriedly. "The light rays strike this
film, hurtle around the object, it coats--at increased speed, probably,
but there are no instruments accurate enough to check that--and emerge
on the other side. Thus, you can look at a body so filmed, and not see
it: your gaze travels _around_ it and rests on objects in a straight
line behind it. But you'll see for yourself in a moment. Pull that
switch, there, will you? And leave it on for two full minutes after you
have ceased to see me."

Straight and tall, a figure encased in shimmering crystal, the scientist
stood on the metal plate. Hesitant, with the superstitious dread growing
in his heart, the Secretary stood with his hand on the switch. That hand
pulled the switch down....

Soundlessly the overhead metal ring began to whirl, gathering speed with
every second. And then, though he had known in advance something of what
was coming, the Secretary could not suppress a shout of surprise.

The man before him on the metal plate was vanishing.

       *       *       *       *       *

Slowly he disappeared from view--slowly, as an object sinking deeper and
deeper into clear water disappears. Now the face was but a white blob.
Now the entire body was but a misty blur. And now a shade, a wavering
shadow, alone marked Winter's presence.

The Secretary could not have told the exact instant when that last faint
blur oozed from sight. He only knew that at one second he was gazing at
it--and at the next second his eyes rested on a rack of test-tubes on
the wall beyond the plate.

He looked at his watch. Sweat glistened in tiny points on the hand that
held the switch. It was all so like death, this disappearance--as if he
had thrown the switch that electrocuted a man.

The specified two minutes passed. He cut off the power. The great ring
lost speed, stopped whirling. And on the plate was--nothing.

At least it seemed there was nothing. But a moment later a deep voice
sounded out: "I guess I'm invisible, all right, according to the
expression on your face."

"You are," said the Secretary, mopping his forehead, "except when you
speak. Then I have the bizarre experience of seeing glimpses of teeth,
tongue and throat hanging in mid-air. I'd never have believed it if I
hadn't witnessed it myself! That paint of yours is miraculous!"

"A little complicated, but hardly miraculous. It has a cellulose base,
and there is in it a small per cent of powdered crystal--but the rest
I'll keep locked in my brain alone till my country has need of it."

The glimpses of teeth and tongue and throat ceased. In spite of himself,
the Secretary started as an unseen hand touched his shoulder.

"Now,"--there was ringing resolution in the deep voice--"for the
Arvanian Embassy. Please drive me there--and be as quick as you can
about it. I can't last very long with this film sealing most of the
pores of my body."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Secretary started for the laboratory door. Beside him sounded the
patter of bare feet. He opened the door and walked into the hallway.
Behind him, apparently of itself, the door clicked shut; and the
footsteps again sounded beside him.

The Secretary walked to the curb where his limousine waited. His
chauffeur jumped out and opened the door. The Secretary paused a moment,
one foot on the running board, to draw a cigar from his pocket and light
it. During that moment the car pressed down on that side, and as
suddenly rocked back up again.

The chauffeur stared wide-eyed at his employer.

"Did you do that, sir?" he asked.

"Do what?" said the Secretary.

"Push down on the running board with your foot."

"Of course not," said the Secretary, his eyebrows raising. "You could
have seen my leg move if I had. But why do you ask?"

"It felt like somebody got into this car," mumbled the man.

"Did you see anybody get in?" said the Secretary with a shrug. And,
shaking his head, with a fuddled look in his eyes, the chauffeur turned
away and got into the driver's seat.

The Secretary glanced at the rear seat. On the far side, the cushion was
heavily depressed. He sat on the near side, feeling his knee strike
another, unseen knee.

"Drive to the Bulgarian Embassy," he told his man.

Up Sixteenth Street the car swung, past the various embassies which
looked more like palatial private villas than offices of foreign
nations. Toward the end of the line, a smaller building than most of the
others, was the Arvanian Embassy. Next to it was the Bulgarian.

       *       *       *       *       *

The car stopped in front of the Bulgarian Embassy, and the Secretary got
out. Again he paused, while the chauffeur held the door open, to hold a
match to his cigar. Again the car sagged down on that side, and slowly
swayed up again.

"Hey--" said the chauffeur. But meeting the Secretary's calmly inquiring
gaze, he stopped. Scratching his head, he went back to the wheel, while
the Secretary walked toward the building entrance.

Behind him, moving on soundless bare feet along the sidewalk, Thorn
Winter hastened, cloaked in invisibility, toward the Arvanian
Embassy--and the plans that spelled America's destruction if they
remained in Arvanian hands.

The embassy building was a three-storied oblong house of white stone
topping a terrace that started its climb from the sidewalk of Sixteenth
Street. The doors at the head of the wide stone staircase were of
bronze; and they were closed, and, Thorn surmised, efficiently barred.
The windows at front and sides were also closed, in spite of the warmth
of the sunny spring afternoon.

Beside the building, leading up in a short steep hill, was the driveway.
Up this Thorn started. The front of the house was hopelessly barred; but
at the rear entrance there might be a chance.

Up the driveway, then, he walked, a little startled at the fact that he
cast no shadow--feeling as a ghost might feel. The pavement was hot to
his thinly filmed feet. A little dubious as to the effect of heat on the
vital shell that hid him, he stepped off into the cool grass beside the
drive; and came soon to the rear of the embassy.

There was no porch or veranda, simply two stone steps leading up to a
stout oak door which opened onto the embassy kitchens. From behind this
door came the sound of crockery and the hum of voices. The Arvanian chef
evidently was preparing afternoon tea.

       *       *       *       *       *

Walking boldly to the very steps, Thorn began the vigil that should end
when someone came in or out of that door, allowing him to slip inside
the building before the portal was barred shut again.

For nearly half an hour Thorn stood there before something happened that
at once helped him, and, at the same time, nearly proved his undoing.

A light delivery van sped up the driveway. The wheels stirred up a cloud
of dust. It was a very small cloud of very fine dust. Thorn at first
thought nothing of it, because he was so engrossed in the conviction
that here ought to be provided an entrance into the house.

The truck driver got out, took a crate from the body of the van, and
went with it to the back door. After a moment of waiting, the door
opened. Thorn noticed that it was opened very cautiously, only an inch
or so. He caught a glimpse of a heavy chain stretched across the inch
opening, and saw a strip of bearded, resolute face.

The door was unchained. The driver walked in, while the door stood open.
Thorn started to glide in after him....

Mere chance made him glance at a window near the door. This window
framed another bearded, resolute face. And the eyes in that face were
like saucers as they stared full at Thorn!

For an instant Thorn knew icy fear. His invisibility! Had something
happened to strip him of that concealing mantle? But what _could_ have
happened?

He glanced down at himself and saw the reason for the guard's
saucer-eyed expression.

A little of the light cloud of dust stirred up by the truck wheels had
settled over him and clung to the encasing shell. As he moved, these
dust specks moved. The effect to the staring guard, Thorn realized, must
be that of seeing a queer, fine dust column moving eccentrically over a
grassy lawn where no dust column had any business to be.

       *       *       *       *       *

Quickly Thorn moved toward the garage, with the eyes of the amazed guard
following him. The scientist was savage at the delay; but it was vital
that he rid himself of that clinging dust.

Behind the garage he broke off a feathery spray from a vine, and stroked
it lightly over himself. That, too, presented a curious spectacle: a
leafy branch suddenly detaching itself from the parent vine and dancing
here and there in mid-air.

When the all-important task was done, Thorn raced back to the rear
doorway. By great good luck it was still open. He stole in, just making
it as the truck driver, staggering under a load of empty crates, came up
the cellar stairs and went out to his truck.

Thorn drew a deep breath. He was inside the Arvanian Embassy. The place
was a three-storied stone trap in which, if the slightest slip revealed
him to its tenants, he would surely meet his death. But, anyway, he was
inside! And the threatening Ziegler plans waited somewhere near at hand
for him to find and take!

Even had Thorn not known in advance that trouble was brewing, he could
have surmised that something sinister was being hatched in the Arvanian
Embassy. For, in this big sunny kitchen five men lounged about in
addition to the white-coated chef and his beardless stripling of an
assistant. And each of the five had a holster strapped openly over his
coat with the butt of an automatic protruding in plain sight.

Thorn looked about. Across from the great range, beside which he was
standing and holding his breath for fear some one of the seven men
should become aware of his presence, was the door leading to the front
part of the house. He started toward that door, walking on tiptoe. A
shudder crept up his spine as he tiptoed across the floor directly in
front of the armed guards who would have shot him down without
compunction could they have seen him. He was not yet used to his
invisibility; knowing himself to be substantial, feeling his feet
descend solidly on the floor, he still could hardly credit the fact that
human eyes could not observe him.

       *       *       *       *       *

He got to the door. He put out his hand to open it, then realized just
in time that he could not do that. A door stealthily opening and closing
again, with no apparent hand to manipulate it? Such a spectacle would
start a riot!

In a frenzy of impatience, he stood beside the door, waiting till
someone else should swing it open. And in a moment it chanced that the
stripling assistant chef came toward him with a tray. The boy pushed the
swinging door with his foot, and walked into the butler's pantry. After
him, treading almost on the lad's heels, came Thorn.

The boy sat the tray down, and turned to reach into an upper shelf. The
space in the pantry was constricted, and he turned abruptly. The result
was that he suddenly drew back as though a hot iron had seared him, and
went white as chalk. Then he dashed back into the kitchen.

"A hand!" Thorn heard him gibbering in Arvanian. "A hand! I touched it
with mine! Something horrible is in there!"

With his heart pounding in his throat, Thorn leaned close to the
swing-door to hear what happened next. Would there be a rush for the
butler's pantry? An investigation? He eyed the farther door--the dining
room door. But he dared not flee through that save as a last resort. In
the dining room sounded voices; and again the sight of a door opening
and closing of itself would lead to uproar.

"A hand?" he heard one of the guards say in the kitchen. "An unseen
hand? Thou art empty in the head, young Gova."

There followed some jeering sentences in colloquial Arvanian that were
too idiomatic for Thorn's knowledge of the language to let him
understand. A general guffaw came from the rest; and, as no move was
made toward the pantry, Thorn decided he was saved for another few
moments.

Gasping, he raised his hand to wipe the perspiration off his forehead,
then realized there was no perspiration there. His film-clogged pores
could exude nothing; he had only the sensation of perspiring.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now the problem was to get through the next door. Thoughtfully, Thorn
gazed at it. He saw that this, too, was a swing-door. Further, he saw
that now and then it creaked open a few inches, and swung sluggishly
back. Beyond it somewhere a window was open, and spasmodic gusts moved
the swinging slab of wood.

The next time the door moved with the wind, Thorn caught it and
augmented the movement a bit. Twice he did that, each time swinging it
back a trifle further. Next time, he figured, he could open it enough to
slide into the room.

Two glimpses he had had, with the openings of the door, into the room
beyond. These glimpses had showed him a great oval table on which was
set the debris of afternoon tea, and around which were grouped tense,
eager men. Dark of hair and complexion were these men, with the arrogant
hawk noses and ruthless small eyes of the typical Arvanian. Several of
them were garbed in military uniforms and armed with swords. They were
talking in tones too low for Thorn to distinguish words through the film
over his ears. He would have to get in there to hear them.

For the third time the wind pushed at the door. For the third time Thorn
caught its edge and swung it--six inches, eight, almost enough to slip
through....

"Shut thou the window!" crackled a voice suddenly. "Fool! What if some
of these documents blew away?"

There was a slam, and the breeze was cut off. Thorn quickly let go of
the door, and watched it fall back in place again.

He was cursing his luck when he heard the same commanding voice say:
"Kori, see if there be one who listens in the butler's pantry. It seemed
the door opened wider than the wind would warrant."

There was the scrape of a chair. Then the door was abruptly thrust open
and coldly alert eyes in a hostile, wary face, swept over the pantry.

"No one here, Excellency," said Kori; and he returned to his place at
the table.

       *       *       *       *       *

But with him came another, unseen, to stand against the wall beside a
great mahogany buffet, and to listen and watch. Kori had, not
unnaturally, held the door open while he glanced around the pantry. And
under Kori's outstretched arm, so close as almost to brush against his
uniformed legs, had stolen Thorn.

"Then, gentlemen, it is all arranged?" said the man at the head of the
oval table--a spare, elderly individual with bristling gray mustachios
and smoldering dark eyes. "The plans leave for Arvania to-morrow night,
to arrive in our capital city in ten days. Then day and night
manufacture of the Ziegler projectors--and declaration of war. Following
that, this great city of Washington, and the even greater cities of New
York and Chicago, and all, this fine land from Atlantic to Pacific,
shall become an Arvanian possession to exploit as we like!"

There was an audible "Ah!" from the score of men around the
table--broken by a voice in the main double doorway of the dining room:
"Gentlemen, your pardon, I am late."

Thorn looked at the speaker. He was a young fellow with an especially
elaborate uniform and a face that appeared weak and dissipated in spite
of the arrogant Arvanian nose. Then a bark came to Thorn's ears--and a
cold feeling to the pit of Thorn's stomach. The newcomer had brought a
dog with him!

Even as he gazed apprehensively at the dog--a rangy wolfhound--the brute
growled deep in its throat and stared at the corner by the buffet where
Thorn was instinctively trying to make himself smaller.

The dog growled again, and stalked warily toward the buffet.

"Grego, down," said his master absently. Then, to the spare man at the
head of the table: "I have been next door, talking to the American
Secretary of War. A dull fellow. Convinced, is he, that Arvania harbors
only kind thoughts for this great stupid nation. They shall be utterly
unprepared for our attack--Grego! What ails the brute?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The wolfhound had evaded several outstretched hands and got to the
buffet. There it crouched and cowered, fangs showing in a snarl, eyes
reddening wickedly, while the growl rattled louder in its shaggy throat.

"Perhaps the heat has affected him," said one.

All were looking at the dog now, marveling at its odd behavior. But of
all the eyes that observed it a pair of unseen eyes watched with the
utmost agitation.

Thorn stared, almost hypnotized, at the creature. A dog! What rotten
luck! Men might be fooled by the masking invisibility, but there was no
deceiving a dog's keen nose!

The wolfhound started forward as though to leap, then settled back.
Plainly it longed to spring. Equally plainly it was afraid of the being
that so impossibly was revealed to its nostrils but not to its eyes.
Meanwhile, one tearing sweep of blunt claws or sharp fangs--and a fatal
rent would appear in Thorn's encasing shell!

The dog snapped tentatively. Thorn flattened still harder against the
wall, with discovery and death hovering very closely about him. Then the
beast's master intervened.

"Grego! Here, sir! A council room is no place, for thee, anyway. Here, I
say! So, then--"

He hastened to the dog and caught its collar. Twisting the leather
cruelly, he dragged the protesting, snarling brute to the doors and slid
them shut with the wolfhound barking and growling on the outside.
"Someone put him in his kennel," he said through the panels. A scuffling
in the hall told of the execution of the order. The council room became
quiet again, and Thorn leaned against the wall and closed his eyes for
an instant.

"We were saying, Soyo," the leader addressed the dog's owner, "that the
Ziegler plans start for Arvania to-morrow night. All is arranged. These
innocent looking bits of paper"--he thumped a small packet of documents
lying before him--"shall deliver mighty America to us!"

       *       *       *       *       *

A subdued cheer answered the man's words--while Thorn stared at the
packet of papers with unbelieving eyes. It had never occurred to him
that the Ziegler plans might be in that very room, on the table with the
rest of the welter of letters, thumbed documents, and cups and saucers.
And there they were--the vital projector plans--not in a safe or hidden
in some fantastic place, but right before his eyes!

Involuntarily his hand extended eagerly toward the packet, then was
withdrawn. Not now. _He_ was invisible--but the papers, if he grasped
them, would not be. Clenched in his unseen hand, they would be perfectly
visible, moving in jerks and starts as he raced for the door.

Like lightning his mind turned over one plan after another for making
away with that precious packet. Each scheme seemed impossible of
fulfilment.

"The biggest difficulty is in getting them out of the country," the
spare, elderly man was saying. "But we have solved that. Solved it
simply. I myself shall bear them, sewn in my clothes, to our native
land. The American authorities could search, on some pretext, any other
of our number who tried to smuggle them out. But _me_ they dare not lay
a finger on. That would be an overt act."

Thorn's thoughts whirled desperately on. Wait till later and follow
whoever left the room with the plans? But he hated to let them get out
of his sight.

And at this point he became suddenly aware that the man named Kori was
gazing fixedly at him.

Thorn was between the section of the table where Kori sat, and the
angular buffet-end. Kori could not possibly see anything but the shining
mahogany, thought Thorn. And yet the man's eyes were narrowing to
ominous slits as he started in his direction.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thorn held his breath. Was the shielding film changing in structure?
Were the repolarized atoms slowly losing their straight-line
arrangement, allowing light rays to penetrate through to his body
instead of diverting them to form a pocket of invisibility around him?
The film had never acted like that before--but never before had Thorn
applied it to living flesh with its disintegrating heat and moisture.

"Excellency," said Kori at last, a hard edge to his voice, "look thou at
that buffet. No, no--the end nearest my chair."

"Well?" said the elderly man. "I see nothing."

Thorn breathed a sigh of relief. But the relief was to be of short
duration.

"Come to my place, if thou wilt, and see from here," said Kori.

The leader got up and came to Kori's place. Kori pointed straight at
Thorn.

"There--seest thou anything out of the ordinary?"

"I see nothing," said the leader, after a moment. "Thine eyes, Kori, are
not good."

"They are the eyes of a hawk," said Kori stubbornly. "And they see
this--the vertical line of the end of that buffet does not continue
straightly up and down. At its middle, the line is broken, then
continues up--a fraction of an inch to the side! Like an object seen
under water, distorted by the sun-rays that strike the surface!"

Thorn fairly jumped away from the buffet and stood against bare wall.
Fool! Of course the light refraction would not be perfect! Why hadn't he
thought of that--thought to stand clear of revealing vertical lines!

"There, it is gone," said Kori, blinking. "But something, Excellency,
made that distortion of line. And something made Soyo's wolfhound act as
it did! Something--"

"Art thou attempting to say a spy listens unseen in this room?" demanded
the gray-mustachioed Arvanian.

"Something is odd--that is all I say."

       *       *       *       *       *

All eyes were ranging along the wall against which Thorn leaned his
back. All eyes finally turned to Kori. "It is nonsense." "I see nothing
whatever." "Kori has drunk of champagne in place of tea!" were some of
the exclamations.

And then occurred the thing that, in Thorn's perilous position, was like
the self-signing of his own death warrant.

He sneezed.

That agony of helplessness, as a man's nose wrinkles and twitches
and--in spite of the most desperate attempts at repression--the
betraying sound forces its way out! How many men have lost their lives
because of that insistent soft nasal explosion which can be smothered,
but not entirely hushed!

Thorn had felt the sneeze coming on for seconds. He had fought it
frantically, with life itself at stake. But he could not hold it back.
In his naked body, beginning to burn with fever from the long-clogged
pores and insulated not at all by the film from the coolness of the
room, the seeds of that soft explosion had been planted--and they
_would_ bear fruit!

So he had sneezed!

Instantly there was chaos. Men looked at each other, and back at the
blank wall from which had come the painfully muffled sound. Then all
sprang to their feet.

"Champagne, is it!" Kori exulted savagely. "Did I not say my eyes were
those of a hawk?"

"Double guard all doors!" roared the Arvanian leader, to the guards
outside. "Someone is in the house! And you in here," he went on in a
lower tone, "see that this unseen one dies!"

Soyo and several other men whipped out automatics and pointed them at
the wall. Thorn dropped to the floor. But with his quick action came
Kori's voice.

"No, no! The sword, gentlemen. It is not so noisy, and covers a wider
sweep."

Thorn shivered. Far rather would he have had bullets as his lot than
cold steel. The prospect of being hacked to pieces, of gradually
emerging from invisibility as a lump of gashed and bleeding flesh,
turned him faint.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Arvanians split up into orderly formation. Two went to guard the
door to the butler's pantry, and two to cover the closed sliding doors
to the outer hall. Six, with drawn swords sweeping back and forth before
them, walked slowly toward the wall from which the sneeze had come.

Thorn set his jaws--only just catching himself in time to prevent his
lips from opening in the half-snarl instinctive to the most civilized of
men when danger is threatening. That lip motion would have revealed his
teeth for an instant!

The sensation of perspiring heavily flamed over him again. There were so
many trifling things to keep in mind! And each, if neglected, meaning
certain death!

The nearest of the marching six stopped with his foot almost touching
Thorn's hand. The dancing sword the man carried almost grazed the
scientist's shoulder on its down sweep.

Thorn could not stay there. Lying flat along the baseboard, he would be
stabbed at any instant by an inquiring sword point.

The six spread a little. A very little. But there was room enough for
Thorn to slide between the two men nearest him and roll soundlessly
under the table.

There was no sanctuary for him there. The cursed Kori, with his hawk
eyes, glanced under the table after stabbing vainly along the wall.

"The carpet!" he bellowed. "See how the nap is pressed down! He is under
there, comrades!"

The thrusting swords raked under the table a half second or so after
Thorn had rolled out the other side, upsetting a chair in his hurry.

"After him!" panted Soyo. "By the living God, this is wizardry! But he
must not get away--"

"He won't!" snapped the elderly leader. "Men, form a line at the far end
of the room and march slowly, shoulder to shoulder, to this end. The spy
must be caught!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The move was executed. All the men in the room, save the four guarding
the doors, lined up and advanced slowly, swerving and slashing their
swords. Like a line of workers hand-harvesting a wheat field they
came--foot by foot toward the corner where Thorn turned this way and
that in a vain effort to escape.

The line reached the table. Over and under and around it the swords
slashed viciously, leaving no space unprobed.

Thorn clenched his fists. He gazed at the packet containing the Ziegler
plans. He gazed at the guarded door leading back to the kitchen. Then he
tensed himself and leaped.

"The plans!" shouted Kori hoarsely. "Look--"

The vital packet, as far as the eye could see, had suddenly grown wings,
soared from the table top, and was floating rapidly, convulsively,
toward the door.

"Stop him!" yelled Soyo. "Stop--"

At that instant the heads of the two who guarded the door were dashed
together. The door itself slammed open. The Ziegler plans sped into the
butler's pantry.

The door to the kitchen began to open just as Kori reached the pantry.
An oath burst from the Arvanian's lips. He flung his sword. In the air,
shoulder high, appeared suddenly a small fountain of blood. Kori yelled
triumphantly.

Thorn, feeling the warm drip following the glancing slash in his
shoulder, knew the veil of invisibility had at last been rent.
Abandoning efforts at noiselessness, knowing that his whereabouts was
constantly marked by the packet in his hand, anyway, he fled through the
kitchen to the rear door.

The bolt jerked back, under the astonished eyes of the five guards who
had not yet realized precisely what the commotion was all about--and who
only saw a packet of papers waving in mid-air, a trickle of blood
appearing out of nothing, and a bolt banging open in its slot for no
reason whatever.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thorn's fingers worked feverishly at the chain. But before he could
begin to get it undone, the guards had recovered from their surprise and
had joined the Arvanians who poured in from the dining room under Kori's
lead.

With a score of men crowding the kitchen, Thorn looped back in his
tracks like a hunted creature, and sought the cellar door. Four men he
upset, one after another, aided by the fact that his twisting body could
be only approximately placed by the papers and the wound.

Then Kori's hand swept through the air above the waving packet, to clamp
over Thorn's wrist.

With an effort--that bulged the muscles of that blacksmith's fore-arm of
his till it seemed they must burst through the film, Thorn whirled Kori
clear off his feet and sent him stumbling into the charge of three
guards. But in the meantime the cellar was barred to him by a double
line of men.

Fighting for his life--and, far more important, the existence of his
country--Thorn lashed out with his invisible right fist while his left
clutched the plans.

A score of men arrayed in a death struggle against one! But the odds
were not twenty to one. Not quite. The score could mark Thorn's general
whereabouts--but they could not see his flying right fist! That was an
invisible weapon that did incredible damage.

But if they could not see the fist to guard against it, they could see
the results of the fist's impacts. Here a nose suddenly crumpled and an
instant later gushed red. There a head was snapped back and up, while
its owner slowly sagged to the floor. And all the while the still
dripping wound and the packet of documents kept with devilish ingenuity
between the body of some swordless guard and the impatient blades of the
Arvanian nobles.

Almost, it seemed to Thorn, he would win free. Almost, it appeared to
the Arvanians, the unseen one would reach the big window near the
door--which the path of his wreckage indicated was his goal. But one of
the wildly swinging fists of a guard caught Thorn at last.

It landed on the glass cup over his right eye, cutting a perfect circle
in the skin around the eyesocket, and tearing the film over the glass!

       *       *       *       *       *

Now there were three things about the lithe, invisible body that the
Arvanians could see: the crumpled papers, a slowly drying patch of blood
that moved shoulder high in the air, and a blood-rimmed, ice-gray eye
that glared defiance at them from apparently untenanted atmosphere.

Then came what seemed must be the end. Soyo appeared in the pantry
doorway with a machine gun.

"Everybody to the end of the kitchen by the window!" he cried. "To the
devil with silence--we'll spray this room with lead, and let the sound
of shots bring what consequences it may!"

The men scattered. The machine gun muzzle swept toward the place where
the eye, the papers, and the blood spot were to be seen.

That spot was now at one end of the great kitchen range on which a few
copper pots simmered over white-hot electric burners. At the other end
of the range, in the end wall of the kitchen, was a second window. It
was small, less than a yard square, and had evidently been punched
through the wall as an afterthought to carry off some of the heat of the
huge stove.

Soyo's face twisted exultantly. The machine gun belched flame. Chasing
relentlessly after the dodging, shifting blood spot, a line of holes
appeared in the wall following instantly on the tap--tap--tap of the
gun.

Eye and papers and blood spot appeared to float through the air. One of
the copper pots on the range flew off onto the floor. The glass of the
small ventilating window smashed to bits. In the jagged frame its broken
edges presented, the Arvanians saw for a flashing instant the seared,
blistered soles of a pair of human feet.

"Outside!" bawled Kori. "He jumped onto the range and dove through the
window! After him!"

       *       *       *       *       *

After precious seconds had been wasted, the rear door was unchained and
wrenched open. The Arvanians, swords and guns drawn, raced out to the
rear yard.

His Excellency's town car, that had been standing in front of the open
garage doors, leaped into life. With motor roaring wide open, it tore
toward the Arvanians, some of whom leaped aside and some of whom were
hurled to right and left by the heavy fenders....

Startled people on Sixteenth Street saw a great town car swaying down
the asphalt seemingly guided by no hand other than that of fate; some
said afterward they saw a single eye gleaming through the windshield,
but no one believed that. Equally startled people saw the car screech to
a stop in front of the home of the Secretary of War. After it, scarcely
a full minute later, three motors with the Arvanian coat of arms on them
came to a halt.

"My dear fellow," said the Secretary blandly to the livid Arvanian
Ambassador, "no one has come in here with papers or anything else. I saw
a man jump out of your town car and run south on Connecticut Avenue.
That's all I know."

"But I tell you--" shrieked the Arvanian.

He stopped, impaled on the Secretary's icy cold glance.

"Your story is rather incredible," murmured the Secretary. "Valuable
plans stolen from your Embassy by an invisible man? Come, come!"

Dark Arvanian eyes glared into light American ones.

"By the way," said the Secretary affably, "I am thinking of giving a
semi-official banquet to celebrate future, friendly relations between
our two countries. Do you approve?"

The Arvanian Ambassador tugged at his collar to straighten it. World
dominion had been in his fingers--and had slipped through--but he would
not have been a diplomat had he let his face continue to express the
bitterness in his heart.

"I think such a banquet would be a splendid idea," he said suavely.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RADIANT SHELL ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Operation Boomerang
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Operation Boomerang

Author: George Revelle

Illustrator: Ed Emshwiller


        
Release date: June 30, 2019 [eBook #59842]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/59842

Credits: Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OPERATION BOOMERANG ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          OPERATION BOOMERANG

                           BY GEORGE REVELLE

                _There are all kinds of heroes. And the
               irony of it all lies in the fact that the
            bravest are those who are unknown and unsung._

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
               Worlds of If Science Fiction, April 1957.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Wade Boeman let his eyes wander up the hull of the huge silver ship. He
thought; _if only Tomer were here now!_ He caught himself and quickly
erased the thought before he remembered more ... things that were better
left alone, hidden behind the thin veil he had created in his mind.

The quick blink of a signal light from the tower caught the corner of
his eye. H-hour minus fifteen minutes. The ground crews had cleared
the area. He hadn't noticed. He turned to the huge, blond man standing
beside him.

"Well, Allen. This is it. I've checked everything myself. You should
have no trouble. Be sure and strap yourself in tightly and don't forget
to check the gyro. Its the only thing we can't double check from the
tower."

"You're all through instructing now, _teacher_," the blond man said.
"I can take it from here. And I can't say I'm sorry."

Wade wanted to say then all the little things that had been building up
within him during the past long months. He bit back the words. It took
much effort.

He said: "Good luck, Captain. I really mean it."

Allen gave him a tight smile. "Drop dead, Colonel."

Wade dropped his outstretched hand as the big man ignored him. Ackerson
turned his back and began to climb the metal rungs leading up the hull
of the ship.

Tomer, Wade thought. If only it could be Tomer instead of Ackerson.

He waited until the blond man entered the hatch before he climbed into
the jeep. He glanced once more at the silver hull of the _Starfrost_,
then he jammed down on the accelerator. Hate was a word Wade seldom
used. There was too much of it in the world already. But he was
beginning to hate Ackerson.

He parked the jeep beside the concrete and steel structure housing
Operations. The instant his hand touched the door handle he tried to
cease being Wade Boeman the man. He tried to become Colonel Wadon G.
Boeman, senior officer in charge of 'Operation Boomerang,' with no
personal feelings. It didn't come off fully.

The four walls were lined with banks of instruments. Small lights
flickered and died, only to come alive again the next instant. A man
coughed.

He nodded at a communications man, a civilian, as he hurried to the
small table where the television set was resting. The closed circuit
showed the _Starfrost_ resting alone on the sand with her nose pointed
toward the sky.

He took off his cap, then lighted a cigarette. He checked his wrist
watch with the large clock on the wall. He set the sweep second hand to
coincide with the larger one.

"Twelve minutes, Colonel," someone behind Wade said.

He wiped his dry lips as he flicked his eyes in the direction of the
Major in charge of the control panel. The Major gave him a tight smile.
Wade nodded. Major Gormely was a good man ... they were all good men.
Wade felt proud to be part of the team.

He took in the radar man checking the never-ending sweep of the beam.
Frank Piluis, a tall, lanky man of twenty-three. He was checking the
screen, adjusting, as if his own life depended on its operation instead
of a man he hardly knew.

Wade checked his own screen again.

The _Starfrost_ was so silent ... so latent ... so important. Wade
found Tomer creeping into his thoughts again. He shut the thought out
quickly. Wade was a military man. He had orders to forget Tomer. He
gave orders. He also had to take them.

Wade became mindful of someone standing behind him. He turned. The man
was tall, wearing the cloak of authority in the very way he smiled.
Distinguished looking streaks of gray ran over his once brown hair.
Tiny wrinkles at the eyes told that he was a man with a sense of humor
even though pressed with responsibility.

"A penny for your thoughts, Wade." The Secretary of Defense said as
Boeman got up. Wade wondered if the man had been in the control room
all the time. He hadn't seen him.

"They aren't worth it, Harry," he answered, offering his hand.

"As bad as that," the Secretary laughed. "Here we are on the edge of
a History making moment and you're wasting your time with worthless
thoughts."

Worthless thoughts. Wade wondered if they were, really.

Wade first met Harry Lowe a long time ago when the project was just a
dream on the drawing boards. Since that time he had come to know the
Secretary intimately. Now, suddenly, he felt awkward before the man.
Perhaps it was because Lowe seemed to have a special talent for reading
peoples' expressions, converting them into sentences. Like now, Wade
felt the man was reading his face like a book.

"That's right, Harry. History is being made isn't it?"

The Secretary's face became very serious. "More than that, Wade.
Perhaps salvation depends on it."

"Ten minutes," a voice said.

Wade nodded at the technician. Tiny lights came into play on
the control panel as Major Gormely began closing circuits. The
communications man made a final type check on the huge P.C.R. set.

"_Starfrost._ This is Mother. How do you read me? Over."

"Mother. This is _Starfrost_. Loud and clear. Five by five." Ackerson's
strong voice came from the loud-speaker located in the center of the
equipment. "Oxygen checks. I've bedded down. Give the Colonel my love."

The radio man looked at Wade. There had been no mistaking the sarcasm
in Ackerson's voice. Wade felt his face grow red.

"He hasn't changed," he heard the Secretary say.

"No. He hasn't changed." Wade said softly.

"Don't let it throw you, Wade. You've done a good job. We both know
that nothing counts but the Project."

_Nothing counts but the project._ Personal feelings, ideals, not even
human lives. _Nothing counts but the project._ How many times had he
said that to himself, trying to be convincing.

"It's Tomer. Isn't it?" the Secretary said.

Wade's eyes locked with those of the older man. There was no sense
going over that now. They had had it out a dozen times already.

"That and other things," he said.

"Like Ackerson's attitude, I suppose."

"Like Ackerson's attitude."

The Secretary gave a tight smile. "We all have reasons for doing
things, Wade. To you this is a military feat that could spell security
for years to come. To me it does that and more. It could be the opening
of a new frontier, something that will provide a new outlet for
humanity instead of war."

Wade said: "And to Ackerson it will mean fame and fortune. Nothing
more. His name will go in the history books. There will be personal
appearances, contracts, money. He has no feelings at all about what
this will mean to his country."

The Secretary nodded. "You're a professional military man, Wade. You're
making it your life. I understand how you feel."

Wade laughed bitterly, inside. _Did_ Harry know how he felt? Did he
think that military men were just brass and polish with no feelings, no
friends to worry about, no cares outside of regulations and orders!

"Eight minutes." The voice came again.

Wade left the Secretary, went to the mike resting on the communications
desk.

"_Starfrost._ This is Mother," he said.

"Go ahead, Mother." Ackerson recognized his voice.

"Double check everything. Repeat. Double check everything, oxygen,
hammock straps, loose objects, everything."

"Relax, Mother! You sound like you're going to have another baby."
Ackerson laughed over the loud-speaker.

Wade gave the mike back to the radio man carefully. He walked back to
the small television screen and sat down. The _Starfrost_ looked like a
silver monument standing alone out there on the sand. Soon there would
be nothing there but sand. Wade felt like a mother hen waiting for her
first egg.

He adjusted the contrast, brightened the picture. Perhaps the Secretary
was right. Everyone had their reasons for doing things. He wondered
what Tomer's were?

"Do you think he will make it, Wade?"

The Secretary sat down on the edge of the desk. He looked out of place.
He should have been behind one, a large mahogany one.

"I think he will," Wade said softly. "The test ship we sent made it.
There is no reason to believe a ship with a man in it should fail."

"Do you want him to make it?"

The words jarred Boeman. He searched the Secretary's face. "Of course I
do. What makes you say a thing like that?"

The Secretary toyed with his tie. He said nothing.

Wade got up. He could feel the anger begin to seep through his body.
"You know what this trip means to me--to the country." He faced the
gray-haired man squarely. "If you're insinuating that I want him to
fail because I disagree with his reasons for volunteering, you're
wrong. Dead wrong."

Wade found himself lighting a cigarette. "Sure. I dislike Ackerson.
Dislike him violently. I've taken more lip from him in the past months
than I've taken during my entire life. And when he returns that will be
finished or I'll finish him. One way or another." Wade inhaled deeply.
"It's the project that counts. Only the project. It's bigger than one
man ... it's bigger than all of us put together."

Lowe smiled. His face seemed younger. "I knew you felt that way, Wade.
I just wanted you to say it for your own benefit. Perhaps it will make
this entire thing easier for you."

The Secretary moved then, over to the communication panel.

"Three minutes," someone said.

Wade looked at the narrow back of Harry Lowe. And he knew how the man
became Secretary of Defense. It was shrewd getting him to open up
like that. They both knew how lucky they were to have Allen Ackerson.
Finding men capable of making such a flight hadn't been easy. Of the
dozen volunteers only Ackerson remained. Mental and physical tests had
eliminated all but a few. Those remaining were unfit for space travel,
weeded out by the psychological teams, unable to cope with the morbid
phobia of being alone so long wrapped in a metal cocoon. Only Ackerson
and Tomer had succeeded. Now there was only Ackerson.

"Colonel!" Wade turned and faced the rawboned sergeant standing beside
him. Meyers was a big man with a deep tan browning his face.

"What is it, sergeant?"

Meyers handed him a large white envelope. "Captain Ackerson said to
give this to you just before take-off."

"Thanks, sergeant."

"Two minutes," someone said. Wade stuffed the envelope inside his
jacket. Then he hurried over to the radar man. The envelope had to
wait, there was no time now.

"Are we set?" he asked. The man nodded as he adjusted the dials. Wade
smiled. These men were experts in their fields. To double check them
would be to insult them. Besides, this wasn't the first time for them.
The same crew had been operating when they fired the test rocket. He
knew they wouldn't fail.

"One minute ... 59 ... 58 ... 57...." Wade found himself counting under
his breath while he stared at the small screen on the table. Would
the reactors work? They would go on at 30. And the _Starfrost_! Would
it lift--or would it, like some others before it, slowly hesitate,
then begin a weird, frightening slide to the side to become a flaming
blowtorch of death.

"30!" Major Gormely closed the switch. Wade became conscious of the
Secretary watching the screen with him.

"... 5 ... 4 ... 3 ... 2...." The counter continued. "FIRE!"

The _Starfrost_ shivered.

Wade felt his heart skip a beat. Slowly, ever so slowly, the huge ship
began to move. Dust, sand and smoke mingled with the sheets of flame
pouring from her stern. The platform disappeared in a puff of smoke.

The _Starfrost_ lifted.

"Thank God!" the Secretary sighed.

"Amen." Wade muttered. He took out another cigarette. He was glad it
had begun; the project. Now there was only the long wait.

"Ackerson's a brave man." The Secretary said.

"Of course he is." Wade never had any doubts about Allen's intestinal
fortitude. The man had a good war record. Confidence seemed to ooze
out of the man. It was his attitude, damn it.

Wade drew deeply on the cigarette. Tomer had been the same type in many
ways. Eager, filled with the enthusiasm, unafraid. A small man compared
to the blond Ackerson, he seemed to carry himself tall. And his
attitude. He felt the same intensity about National defense as Boeman
did himself. Perhaps that was another reason he had felt close to the
boy. Tomer would have made this trip with no thought whatsoever about
the financial rewards or what the history books would have to say about
him.

"... Sixty thousand ..." someone said.

"Start communication," Wade commanded automatically.

"Romeo." The commo picked up the small hand mike. All eyes in the room
centered on the silent speaker on the wall.

"_Starfrost._ This is Mother. How do you read me, over?"

The speaker remained silent.

"_Starfrost._ Can you read me. Over!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Secretary looked at Wade. His face was tight and drawn. "What do
you think, Wade. Are we getting through?"

"It's hard to say. He's moving pretty fast. He could outrun the signal.
We've never had a practical voice test."

Lowe's face had a worried expression covering it. "Didn't you have
communications with the test rocket?"

"That was unmanned ... remember?"

"This silence doesn't worry you?" the Secretary asked with amazement.

"Ackerson was trained for this. He knows there is nothing we can do for
him. _He's on his own._ Communications would be to our advantage, to be
sure. But Ackerson knows that ship like you know the back of your hand.
Besides ... perhaps he is too busy to answer right now. He has to be
sure there is no wobble."

"Wobble!"

"Sure. The ship could begin to oscillate. If it does that he is done.
He has to keep his eye on the gyro."

The Secretary's eyes penetrated. "I can't help but feel that you would
be more concerned if Tomer were in the _Starfrost_ instead of Ackerson.
Wade ... don't let the fact that you hate Ackerson cloud the issue. He
is doing us a great service."

"Stop it, Harry!"

"After all. The first man to circle the Moon is entitled to a place in
the history books. I can share his feelings, in a way. It's a great
thing he's doing."

"Others have done more," Wade said sharply.

"Of course they have. But remember one thing. If Ackerson succeeds we
will get the appropriations we need to _build_ up there on that cold
chunk of rock. We need that ... need it badly."

"I tell you we have nothing to worry about yet," Wade said quickly.

"Have it your way, Wade. But remember, we can't land on the Moon until
we have appropriations for installations. It all takes money; landing
sites, protection against the elements, and most important, take-off
facilities. It's a big order. Ackerson can give us all of that if he is
successful. The public will back us to the limit if we prove we have
mastered space travel." The Secretary watched Wade carefully. "Ackerson
_is_ important!"

"I never said he wasn't."

"I know, Wade." The Secretary toyed with his tie. "But did you let your
feelings toward Tomer interfere with your attitude toward Ackerson?
He came to me you know, about halfway through the course. He said you
were babying Tomer to the point where it was interfering with _his_
instruction."

"He lied," Wade cut in. He threw down the cigarette he was holding and
ground his heel into it. "You know me better than that!"

"Of course. But perhaps Ackerson did have _something_. Perhaps you
spent more time with Tomer than you intended. Unconsciously you may
have favored him to the point where Ackerson did suffer."

Wade let his eyes wander over to the small television screen. It was
still operating. Flat, empty sand and a burned out area was all that
remained of the _Starfrost_. He wondered: Did I do that? Did I forget
to teach Ackerson something while I was working with Tomer?

The loud-speaker crackled.

"Mother. This is _Starfrost_. Over."

The operations room came alive. Wade and Lowe hurried over to
stand beneath the speaker, as if that would put them closer to the
_Starfrost_.

"Go ahead, _Starfrost_. This is Mother." The communications man held
the mike in a hand that wasn't quite as steady as it should be.

"This is _Starfrost_. Everything in the green. Repeat, everything in
the green. Over."

Wade took the mike. "How is the gyro, _Starfrost_!"

The loud-speaker laughed. "Tsk, tsk, Colonel. Where is your radio
procedure? You forgot to say over." There was a pause and Boeman knew
why. "Don't tell me you're worrying about ole Ack. I've got this thing
sewed up. Why don't you take a walk around the park and see if you can
find that little guy? What was his name? You know the one I mean. The
one who got cold feet and dropped out before you finished feeding him.
Over."

Wade handed the mike back to the commo man without a word. He looked
at the Secretary. Lowe's eyes cautioned him. Wade swallowed the things
he was going to say. Orders. Damn them. He wanted to stick a pin in
Ackerson's ego. And it would be so easy. So damn easy. Orders. He gave
them and he had taken them.

Wade turned and got the mike again. "This is Mother. Keep an eye on the
hull temperature. Watch that gyro. If you feel the slightest vibration
be sure to start the auxiliary immediately. Over."

"Romeo, Mother. Take care of my letter. I--" the speaker became silent.

Major Gormely moved like a blur of light. Wade knew what was wrong
the instant he looked at the pip on the radar scope. Major Gormely
hurriedly began checking instruments. But he had seen too. The
equipment was in order. It was the _Starfrost_. It had all indications
of a "wobble".

"This is serious, isn't it, Wade?"

Boeman didn't look at the Secretary when he answered. His eyes were
glued to the radar scanner. "Pretty much. It could be the end if he
doesn't catch it in time."

"What can we do?"

"Nothing but wait. He isn't finished yet. He has the extra gyro. That
should do it. If not he can try the fuel as a last resort. It's only
theory plus but he might be able to blast something with substance
against the dorsel fin. If he plays it carefully he might be able to
give the gyro a hand. It will be tricky but we think it can be done."

"What effect will that have on the mission? He has only so much fuel!"

"He can waste thirty seconds. After that he is cutting himself short on
the leg home."

"The wobble stopped," Major Gormely said quickly.

It was true. The course was slightly erratic but Ackerson had the
_Starfrost_ back under control. Wade wiped the back of his hand over
his lips. Suddenly he felt tired and old. He wanted to sit down. "Keep
trying on the radio, Mike," he said.

He walked over to the small table with the television set on it. He
switched it off. He didn't want to look at that empty sand. He lighted
another cigarette. Then he reached inside his blouse and withdrew the
letter Ackerson had left for him. He didn't want to read it. For the
first time he had felt close to the blond man ... felt sorry for him.
The letter could say something to change that.

"Why don't you read it, Wade?" the Secretary said.

Wade looked up quickly. The Secretary was smiling with that know-all
look of his. Wade reached in his pocket and brought out the pack of
cigarettes. Then he caught himself. But the older man hadn't missed the
one smoldering in the ashtray.

A tight smile creased Wade's face. He felt like a small boy caught with
his hand in the cookie jar. "I know a nice quiet spot in upper New
York. Phonecia! There's a nice trout stream beside the only hotel. The
people are simple and tolerant. And there is a small, private bar where
a man can really relax. I think I'll go up there for a few years when
this is all over."

"Now you're reading _my_ mind," the Secretary said.

They both laughed.

"Seriously, Wade. I think you should take a long rest when this is
over. A man with your knowledge of the human body should realize
that you're fighting fatigue. In fact I've already spoken to General
Dominick about it."

Wade shook his head. "You know I can't do that. I've got another job I
have to take care of first."

"Tomer?"

"Of course."

"I thought we settled on that. Someone else can take over in your place
and handle that. You can supervise if you wish. But not until after
you've had a rest."

"You know better, Harry. This is my baby and I'll handle it. It isn't
that I haven't tried to keep him out of my mind. I have. Yet he always
comes back to haunt me. If not because of my own feelings, then it's
Ackerson reminding me. It's no use. I can't rest with him on my mind."

"Not even when you've had orders?"

Wade snuffed out the cigarette. "I'm finding out that feelings can
sometimes rebel against orders."

"That isn't a good trait for an Army Officer to acquire."

Wade's face took on a sardonic expression. "No. It isn't, is it?" he
said softly.

       *       *       *       *       *

The time piece on the wall was broken. It had to be. Wade had been
watching it for hours and it hardly seemed to move. The _Starfrost_ had
disappeared behind the dark side of the Moon and a press release had
been duly passed on to the anxious public. The world was electrified.
Man had ventured into space. The public hadn't been told that there was
no communication with the _Starfrost_. It was better that way.

Wade fished for another cigarette as he followed the sweep second
hand with his eyes. It was ironic, in a way. Man had ventured to the
Moon and could not land. He dared not. To set foot on the cold, dead
satellite when there was no possible way of return would be inviting
suicide. The test rocket fired at the silent world, and the _Starfrost_
had eaten up the last of the appropriations and it would take a battery
of ships to carry the supplies necessary for the building of take-off
facilities.

That was what Wade wanted, an installation on the Moon before another
nation could make it. It was no secret that the nation that controlled
the Moon in the next war would be in the driver's seat. It would be
a fortress in the sky. And it was no secret that another nation was
almost ready to launch a ship. Wade wanted to get there first.

Wade could feel the sweat on his hands. They felt cold and clammy.
The _Starfrost_ should have reappeared on the radar set an hour ago.
He dared not think of what would happen to Ackerson if the big blond
man miscalculated while in orbit. To shoot off alone into black, empty
space, hurtling out into a void of nothing, where there was only a
cold, quiet death awaiting was no way for a man to die.

Damn it. Where was that silver cocoon? Ackerson had to make it.
Everything depended on the success of the _Starfrost_.

"I think I've got something," Major Gormely cried.

Wade came out of his dream world with a rush. His swift steps covered
the distance to the radar set in a matter of seconds.

Gormely was bending over working with Piluis. And it was there ... a
tiny speck that could only be one thing.

Wade heard himself mutter: "Thank God!"

The control room became a beehive of excitement. These men were
accustomed to success in the face of overwhelming pessimism. Yet this
was almost the ultimate. They were part of a team that had projected
an earthbound object into space. Now it was coming home. "Operation
Boomerang" was nearing fulfilment. The long hours of sweat and worry
were beginning to pay off. The cork was ready to burst out of their
bottled up emotions.

Sergeant Meyers' face was beaming. He was exuberant with excitement.
"I guess that calls for a drink." He took Wade by the arm. "I've been
saving a quart of homemade corn for just this occasion."

Suddenly Meyers stopped. His tan face became a gray mask.

"... pardon me, Colonel ... sir!" He came to rigid attention.

Wade laughed heavily. "I think one drink would be in perfect order,
sergeant. Where do you hide this liquid cob?"

Meyers' face became bright again. He almost tripped as he tried to
salute, about-face, and run at the same time. He was going out the door
when he called back over his shoulder. "In the water closet on one of
the thrones in the latrine ... Sir."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Wade Boeman who ruined Allen Ackerson's exit. He had the staff
car pick up the pilot as soon as the hull of the _Starfrost_ cooled.
The official car had sped back over the barren sand, through the
waiting throng of newsmen, straight to the small office located in
the control building, without a stop. To say that it peeved Ackerson
would be putting it mildly. His face was still burning with anger after
twenty minutes of interrogation. Wade knew it was only the presence of
the Defense Secretary keeping him in line. For that reason he tried to
keep each question brief and simple. Ackerson was dying to get outside
that door and receive some of the acclaim that he was being denied.

"You say you had a chance to look at the test rocket we fired?" Wade
asked.

"Yes sir. It was resting in a red crater, fairly well beat up. It must
have come down hard. In fact it looked like it may have struck a wobble
at the last minute. Of course the terrain is pretty rough up there and
it could have toppled after it hit. I'm sure the camera shots I took
will tell us much more."

Wade felt a sudden twitch in his shoulder. "You said the crater was
red."

"Yes, sir. A bright red. I thought it was strange. It was as if
something spilled out of the ship when she hit."

Wade and the Secretary exchanged glances.

"It was a marking dye so you could pick up the location of the ship,"
Wade said too quickly.

Allen twisted his head as the sound of many voices pierced the quiet
room. Someone cheered loudly. Allen shifted his large frame.

"How was she lying?" Wade asked.

Allen brought his attention back to the two men. It was obvious, he was
becoming annoyed. "Down tail-first. The nose section looked intact.
That's what makes me believe she took on a wobble at the last second.
The nose should have been buried out of sight."

Another cheer forced its way into the room. Suddenly Allen burst out.
"Tell me, Colonel. How's Tomer these days. You remember, that little
guy who quit on you just before the training ended."

The words had the effect the big man had hoped for. Boeman came out of
the chair. His face was a vivid white. "You ..." he began.

The Secretary moved quickly. He was between the two men before Wade
could continue. "That's all for now Captain Ackerson," he said, "or
should I say Mister Ackerson. Your papers have been processed as you
wished. You're a civilian, after sixty days terminal leave, of course."

Ackerson watched the play of emotions on Wade's face. He was enjoying
every second of it. Wade wanted to smash that smug face all over the
floor. Yet he was powerless. Ackerson was still an officer and there
was too much left undone to risk everything now. He sat back down on
the chair. There would be time when the blond man was a civilian.

"Thank you, sir." Allen grinned.

The Secretary extended his hand. "Congratulations again for a job well
done." They shook hands.

"Don't forget, Ackerson," Boeman said as Allen hurried to the door.
"The next week is mine. Solid interrogation. You're still in the
service."

"_Yes, Sir._"

"And one more thing, Ackerson. I know your communication was working.
Why didn't you answer our calls?"

"I thought that would make you sweat a little. I can see that it did."

The door slammed shut.

       *       *       *       *       *

Neither man spoke when the door closed behind Ackerson. The silence was
long. Finally it was Boeman who moved. He opened the top left drawer of
the desk and withdrew a small glass and a bottle. He poured a drink and
offered it to the Secretary with a glance of his eyes. The Secretary
shook his head.

Boeman lifted the tumbler to his lips and poured the liquid down with
a quick motion. He made a face as it burned. He poured another, toyed
with it before he tossed it down.

"Well, he made it." Boeman said finally, placing the empty glass on the
desk. "To the Moon and back--non stop."

"You knew he would, didn't you."

Boeman nodded, staring at the glass.

There was another awkward silence as both men were wrapped in thought.

"Disappointed, Wade?"

"Not disappointed. Disgusted."

"He gave us what we wanted. The appropriations will be easy now."

"I know."

"Then what's wrong? Certainly you can't blame Ackerson fully. He
doesn't know the entire story."

"Perhaps that's what's wrong. If I could just tell the full story I
might feel better."

"Impossible. Can you imagine the entire nation carrying a load on its
back the way you are now?"

Wade laughed bitterly. "It might wake them up."

"I understand, Wade. My insides feel it too. But let him be the hero."

"He will be," Wade said, reaching for the bottle again. "He will be."

"Then let him. We have more important things to think about now." The
Secretary got up. Wade grasped the empty tumbler in the palm of his
hand, squeezing tightly.

"Ackerson said red."

"I know," replied the Secretary.

"Red means danger. The crater should have been stained yellow."

"Perhaps there was a mix-up in containers."

"You don't believe that, Frank."

"But the radio is still operating! A steady C.W. beam is coming in. If
there was any danger we would be getting code."

Wade forced a smile. "You should have been a minister. There is always
hope ... is that it?"

The Secretary placed his hat carefully on his head. "I'd better get
over to the lab and take a look at those movies he took."

"It must be so lonely ..." Boeman said loosely.

"Perhaps not. Tomer was a quiet man. Those kind don't seem to mind."

A sudden, loud cheer broke the near silence in the room. Wade glanced
toward the window. Then he got up slowly with the action of an old man.
He went to the window and looked out.

Ackerson was being carried through a path of humanity aloft on dozens
of shoulders. He was waving to the hundreds of well-wishers as he
was carried toward the battery of microphones waiting on the wooden
platform erected for the occasion. Wade couldn't help but think of a
hero of another age. Lindbergh. It must have been the same then. And
who remembered those that followed him? Or those that paved the way so
he could make it? Wade shook his head.

He turned away from the window quickly, heading for the desk and the
bottle. The Secretary followed him with his eyes, undecided.

Boeman lifted the bottle high above his head in a toasting gesture. "To
the hero."

"Don't, Wade."

The bottle paused there while the eyes of the two men met. Finally the
bottle returned to the desk as Wade surrendered. Then he slumped down
in the chair.

The Secretary placed his hand on Wade's shoulder. Boeman shook it off,
and he was sorry instantly. "O.K. Frank. You win. Ackerson wins."

"Good," the Secretary said softly. "That's the way we want it. We have
to prevent everyone from feeling the way you do now. It isn't that
you're jealous of Ackerson getting the glory. And you know that Tomer
doesn't mind. It's your worrying about him that's clouding your mind.
Everyone would be feeling the same way."

The Secretary looked out the window. "We couldn't have that. It would
have set space travel back years. Ackerson is powerful evidence that
space flight is safe. Tomer is our insurance. We need that just as
badly. We had no choice. We had to stake a claim on the Moon."

Wade poured another drink. "And that conceited ass is getting all the
credit while Tomer is sweating it out up there on that cold chunk of
rock--while everyone thinks he quit the project because he got cold
feet."

"True." The Secretary shook his head. "But Tomer is our ace-in-the-hole
if the iron curtain announces their intentions to land up there.

"Tomer can be contacted. He can set off the signal for the world to
see. In the meantime we will be working to make the next flight a
complete one. It won't take long. Tomer will manage."

"But Ackerson said the crater was red!"

"I know. And I'm wasting time talking with you. I should be looking at
those movies he took."

Wade didn't watch the Secretary leave. He picked up the bottle and
glass and went to the window.

Down on the ramp the P.A. began to crackle. Ackerson was beginning his
speech.

Wade took out the letter that Ackerson had sent to him. He took out
a match and touched the flame to it. It was better that way. He was
finished with Ackerson. He had a job to do now, one that would consume
him. He had to get the _Starfrost II_ underway. He had to get there to
get Tomer.

Suddenly he understood. There were all kinds of heroes. Men like
Ackerson were driven by the lure of fame and money. Tomer became one
because the job had to be done and there was no one else to do it.
Lowe was one, in a way, fighting for peace against a world that was
always in unrest. In a way Wade himself might fall in one category. The
thought made him smile.

The Secretary was right, of course. The public would crucify them if
they knew Tomer had been in the supposedly unmanned test rocket fired
at the Moon with no way home.

Wade lifted his drink high in the air as Ackerson's deep voice carried
into the room from the ramp below. "To a hero," he said. "A lonely
hero." Wade's eyes were on the sky when he said it, on a spot where the
Moon would be some hours later.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OPERATION BOOMERANG ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Memoirs of a Swine in the Land of Kultur; or, How it Felt to be a Prisoner of War
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Memoirs of a Swine in the Land of Kultur; or, How it Felt to be a Prisoner of War

Author: Benjamin Muse


        
Release date: April 3, 2022 [eBook #67760]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Original publication: United States: Ben Muse, 1919

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/67760

Credits: The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MEMOIRS OF A SWINE IN THE LAND OF KULTUR; OR, HOW IT FELT TO BE A PRISONER OF WAR ***

[Illustration: _The Author and an English Fellow-Prisoner, from
Photograph Taken Three Months Before the Armistice. The Author is
Wearing an Old French Uniform With Which he was Fitted Out After
Running Away and Losing his Regulation Prison Costume_]




  _The_
  MEMOIRS OF A SWINE IN THE
  LAND OF KULTUR

  _OR_

  HOW IT FELT TO BE
  A PRISONER OF WAR

  _By_ BEN MUSE

  36926 Lance-Corporal 11th King’s
  Royal Rifles


  _Price 50 Cents_




  COPYRIGHT, 1919
  BY
  BEN MUSE

  THE SEEMAN PRINTERY, DURHAM, N. C.




_PREFACE_


The following narrative tells of the adventures of an American boy in
German imprisonment from his capture November 30, 1917, to his release
December 9, 1918. The author is a native of Durham, N. C., and a
student of Trinity College, who went over and joined the English forces
before America’s entry into the war, serving in the Eleventh King’s
Royal Rifles six months and going through the severe fighting around
Ypres and Cambrai before his capture.




The Memoirs of a Swine in the Land of Kultur _or_, How it Felt to be a
Prisoner of War




CHAPTER I

_Capture_


I was bandaging poor Sergeant Sharpy’s wounds.

“It’s all up with us, Muse,” he said.

I feared that it was all up with _him_, at any rate, as I clumsily
tried to stop the torrent of blood which was flowing from his head and
shoulders.

It was after an hour of one of those hells such as only soldiers of
the line can understand, when death and suffering were everywhere and
survival seemed the rare and lucky exception. The machine gun corporal
on my left had died at his gun, and the contorted body of my good old
mate, “Wally,” blocked the view farther down the trench. On my right
the three survivors of my section were still firing furiously over the
parapet.

Personally I had not suffered from the barrage beyond the interruption
of my preparation for breakfast. The biscuits and jam and chocolate lay
spread on the edge of my “hole,” and the canteen of tea-water over my
boot-dubbin fire steadily refused to boil. I left the wounded sergeant
to look over the top. The mass of running grey uniforms was now very
near us. I could see the flags which they carried and hear the roar of
“Hurrahs” between the bursting of shells.

But who were those brown, unarmed figures running over on our left?
My God! They were our own chaps--already captured! I glanced quickly
around. The Germans were at our rear! The little hill behind us was
dotted with the grey figures, and those flags could be seen in every
direction.

“They’re all around----,” but ere I could finish they were on us. A
shower of hand grenades and then “Fritz” himself.

“Hurra! Hurra! ’Raus! ’Raus!” and shaking with excitement they shoved
their bayonets in my face.

I laid down my rifle and began undoing my equipment.

I helped the sergeant over the top, snatched up a bag of biscuits, took
a last fond look at my tea-water--now beginning to boil!--and scrambled
over after him.




CHAPTER II

_In Conquered France_


The journey to our camp in Germany will be remembered by most of my
comrades only as a hungry nightmare, interrupted at long intervals by
bowls of unsatisfying German soup. Those of us who had enough biscuits
to keep from suffering found it an interesting opportunity to see the
Germans behind their lines and the life of the French under German rule.

The latter were splendid to us. In every town or village through
which we passed, they turned out in crowds to do us honor. Girls
smiled sympathetically and old women cried. Cheering was, of course,
_verboten_.

In one small village an old French gentleman came out into the street
and raised his tall silk hat to us. Instinctively the boys in the front
of our column responded with a salute, and their example was followed
by each section of fours in its turn, as they marched past. Three or
four German officers came up, cursing and shaking their fists to drive
the old man away, but he remained defiantly bare-headed and motionless
until the last of his country’s allies had filed past.

The French would gladly have relieved our hunger, too, from their own
slim stores, had it been possible. As it was they smuggled food to us
at every opportunity. The front files often found loaves of bread and
sandwiches on the sidewalks, placed there hurriedly by the French women
on seeing us coming. Bits of food as well as warm caps and sometimes
jackets were thrown down to us from the second story windows. French
girls ran out of their houses to bring us food and drink, in laughing
defiance of cursing _Landsturmers_--and dashed away again.

It was everywhere evident that, for all our unwashed faces and muddy
and ragged uniforms we were, after all, their friends, and those other
flashy soldiers who swaggered about their streets and into their shops
and homes, were their eternal enemies.

One of the pictures from that journey which remains clearest in my
memory is that of the second night of captivity, standing before the
Cathedral of Le Quesnoy. The edifice loomed beautiful before us in the
mellow moonlight and reflected a feeling of peace and reverence in us
warriors fresh from the trenches. Three women, dressed in black, came
out of the door just as the front of our column marched into the yard.
They stopped, horror-struck, when they saw us there. Would they quarter
us in the Cathedral? One of them hurried away to find the _curé_.
The other two approached the officer in charge of us and protested
in French. Barking out words of brutal German and pushing the ladies
aside, the officer walked on toward the door.

The first lady had now returned with the reverend father. Very calmly
he attempted to prevent this desecration, but the only result was to
exhaust the patience of the vandal officer. Finally he seized the
_curé_ by the shoulders and pushed him down the steps. Then, turning to
the prisoners:

“_Marsch!_” he rasped.

The _curé_ bowed his head and walked away, followed by the three
weeping ladies and the hordes of prisoners and guards crowded slowly
into the Cathedral.




CHAPTER III

_Beggars_


A prisoner of war camp had many characteristics in common with other
communities of human beings. It had its social classes, its great and
its humble citizens, its rich and its poor. In arriving in camp I
was fortunate enough to meet a friend, a Frenchman, with three years
service in captivity and an ample stock of provisions. He “adopted”
me. The fate of my eight hundred comrades, however, was pitiful.
Finding practically nothing in the Help Committee’s stores and being
as yet without help from England, they were forced to subsist on the
German ration which was scarcely enough to keep a man on his feet. The
usual results of hunger set in, and I saw these poor fellows sink into
shabby, hungry, begging wanderers about the camp.

My friend M---- was one of the most important men in the camp. He was
intimate with all the bureau clerks, _Unteroffiziere_, interpreters,
“good” sentries, and other persons worth knowing. He lived with three
French _sous-officers_ in a comfortably furnished or “fixed up”
_Kleines Zimmer_. They had everything that friends could send them in
parcels, and wanted for nothing but liberty and--happiness.

I had just finished a good breakfast of bacon and toast and cocoa,
prepared by the Italian “batman” and was standing before the windows
enjoying a cigar with M----. The door was bolted against beggars who
knocked incessantly from early morning till late at night.

I heard a shuffling outside and a timid tapping on the door; a pause
and another tap; a longer pause, and then a shuffling away.

“_Un italien_,” observed M----, still gazing out the window. Another
visitor walked up, thumped once on the door, and walked away again,
almost without pausing.

“_Un anglais._ You can always tell.”

“Rotten cigars,” he continued, dismissing the subject of the poor
fellows who had gone away from the door, “but you’ll have a chance to
try a real one when Louis comes in. He has a box of Perfectos stuck
away somewhere. What? Still worrying about our unadmitted visitors?”

I was. I was wondering if that last chap was one of my battalion. How
could M---- take it so coolly?

“If you stay long in the camps,” he went on sagely, “you’ll learn that
you can’t afford to weep everytime you see a hungry man. We wept for
ourselves in 1914, and afterwards we wept a lot for other chaps, but
when one’s been in the midst of suffering men for three years, one
learns to keep from thinking about it--or else one would go mad. We
give them what we can spare and then try to think of something else.”




CHAPTER IV

_La Glorieuse Armée Britannique_


The scene on which we gazed through the window was a typical one
for a prison camp. The path along the barbed wire formed a sort
of wretched promenade along which the sufficiently nourished took
their constitutionals. A few English sergeants, two bearded French
_ajutants_, and a group of vivacious young Russian _officiers
aspirants_ were pacing monotonously back and forth as one does on board
ship.

“_Pane![1] Pane, Kamarad!_”

A few Italians had suddenly appeared from across the corner. I was
astonished at their youth. Two of them were but children with blue eyes
and pretty girlish faces.

“Fourteen years old, the one with the handkerchief around his neck,”
explained M----. “The other is fifteen. They were claimed to have
been helping the Italian Army and so were brought here along with the
soldiers.”

“_Pane! Brot!_”[2] they persisted. I chucked them a handful of biscuits.

“No! No!” remonstrated M----. “You’ll fetch the whole tribe of them.”

His words were not long in coming true. A few stray Italians had seen
the incident and were already coming for their share.

“_Pane! Pane! Buono compagno![3] Pane!_”

A crowd quickly gathered around the window.

“_Allez! Allez! Macaroni, Garibaldi, Sacramento, allez!_” and he tried
vainly to wave them back.

“_Pane, pane!_” They were reaching their arms through the windows now.
The Frenchman pushed their arms back and closed the window.

Presently another rabble appeared, a working party of two or three
hundred starving men, urged on by cursing sentries. Slowly and
listlessly they straggled by, hobbling painfully, most of them in their
wooden “clogs.” (Boots and puttees had long gone for food.) Many of
them were of my battalion and company, but they were so altered that
it took a moment’s study to recognize them. There was the smart young
battalion clerk, a well-paid accountant in civilian life, plodding
along like a broken old man, with a full beard and a shabby costume of
German and Russian cast-off clothes. There was “Smiley,” the company
barber, never known to be out of humor. The smile still lingered on his
pale features, but his jokes were lost on his saddened comrades. All
had the hopeless, dejected look of constantly hungry men.

We watched the poor fellows until the last of the “rear guard” had
hobbled past.

“_La glorieuse Armée Britannique!_” observed M----. I looked to see if
he was smiling; but he wasn’t. He meant no sarcasm.

I will leave the first wretched months of captivity--which I like
neither to remember nor to recall to other erstwhile _Gefangener_--for
that simple, more tolerable life which most of us found on the German
farms.

It was the night after my first day’s work on a farm, way up in the
village of Kossebade, Grand Duchy of Mecklenburg. I lay nestled in a
soft feather bed, for the first time in many months, thinking over the
events of the past month and summing up the extent of my good luck.

I had found the people of the household, at first hand, to be
reasonable creatures and I couldn’t grumble at the hardness of the
work. I was particularly astonished at the five meals of substantial
food a day!

I thought, too, of the men captured with me and how much worse they
must be faring. Three hundred of them, I knew, had gone to Lille to
work behind the German line. I had stood at the camp gate to bid them
goodbye as they marched away, for I knew them almost to a man. Poor
fellows, still without help from England, they hobbled away in their
rags and “clogs,” and tattered uniforms (in the middle of January)
with their three slices of bread _for a two days’ journey_, in one hand.

But could I believe my ears! They were singing!--for Tommy always sings
when breaking camp--“Here We Are, Here We Are, Here We Are Again,” it
was, and they sang it right lustily.

I thought less painfully of the comrades which I had left in my last
camp--my room-mates, Fred, Charley and Jack. I wondered if Jack was
still “cleaning up” at pontoon, if Fred was getting his parcels again,
and if Charley was still making those famous “burgoo” puddings.

At last my thoughts drifted inevitably across the sea and home, and I
dreamt of home afterward. Indeed, the next morning I could not tell
where my thoughts had left off and my dream had begun.

[Illustration]


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Italian: Bread.

[2] German: Bread.

[3] Italian: Good comrade.




CHAPTER V

_My First Hardship_


There were two girls on the place, Miga, the farmer’s daughter, and
Erna, the milkmaid. The latter, a big, muscular, typically German
peasant girl, took it upon herself to be my special guardian and tutor
in the art of agriculture, and came to play no less a part in my life
than that of my Woman of Destiny and Chief Tormentor.

Of course, I had told the _Unteroffizier_[4] that I could farm--for
farming was certainly better than mining or munitions making--but, as
a matter of fact, beyond the items that horses ate hay and cows gave
milk, and a general hazy idea that there was a lot of digging attached
to it, I knew nothing about it.

So my tutor had plenty to do--and she did it quite thoroughly. Aside
from her formidable physique, she had a tone of command which could but
strike awe in a new and unsophisticated _Gefangener_.

My greenness she found most uproariously funny, and she gave me every
opportunity to exhibit it. I was put on all of those delightful tasks
which are especially reserved for green-horns, such as chasing the
pigs, leading the cows to the village bull, putting the halter on an
uncatchable colt in the pasture, or lifting a board which was nailed
down.

But I made display of enough of my ignorance without these special
inducements. One day I think I made a blunder of quite everything
which was given me to do. Besides such minor offences as putting the
wrong harness on the horse and tying the cows in the wrong stalls, I
spilled a sack of oats, broke a window-pane in the barn and buried a
young turkey beneath a fork-full of manure--all in one day! At first
Erna scolded sharply, but finding me quite hopeless, she seemed finally
to give me up and simply trust to luck that I would leave the house
standing and some of the stock alive at the end of this “perfect day.”
She did, however, regard me with such a horribly disgusted look that,
had I not been so “fed up” and disgusted myself, I would have had grave
misgivings for my future.

At all events I was convinced that after the failure I had made of the
day’s work, they would not call me in for supper that evening. Indeed,
I would fain have gone to rest without that unearned repast. It didn’t
matter what I did or what they said, I told myself, they were only
Germans, and I wasn’t hungry anyhow. With this intent I was walking
shamefacedly through the kitchen to my cell when Erna swept in.

“Where are you going?” she demanded, seizing me by the collar.
“Supper!” she roared, as she pulled me into the dining room.

The family had already eaten, so I was left to eat with my tormentor.
The table was spread for the first time with a white table-cloth, for
they had evidently had guests. She sat down directly opposite me, and
only once was the silence broken.

“Don’t soil the table-cloth,” she commanded, pointing threateningly
with her fork.

It stirred my blood a bit to think of this creature lecturing me on
table-manners.

“I’ve eaten off more white table-cloths than you,” I retorted bravely,
fumbling at my fork in defence.

She took this sally with contemptuous silence, which continued, with
dark and threatening glances until we finished supper. She finished
first. There was a dreadful pause, then she got up and sat down beside
me!

I watched her with suspicious alarm. I moved a few inches along the
bench and fumbled again at my fork. Then it came--all of a sudden. She
threw her arms around me and kissed me!

“You poor little English fool!” she said.


FOOTNOTES:

[4] German non-commissioned officer.




CHAPTER VI

_The Day of Rest_


Sunday came and I was overjoyed to learn that it was observed even in
Germany. I was feeding the cows when they told me the good news. I
finished feeding them with enough haste to give them three kinds of
indigestion and ran over to the next farm to see my mate, Albert, who
had come to the village along with me. I located him by the strains of
“Carry Me Back to Dear Old Blighty!” played on a mouth harmonica, and
coming from the little room adjoining the cow stall. We greeted each
other as though we had been separated for years.

“Well, old boy, what do you think of it?” I asked.

“All right, but blooming lonesome. Say, what would you have said to a
bloke in ’14 if he had told you you’d be a farmer’s boy in Mecklenburg,
Germany, today?”

“I’d have said he was mad,” I said laughing. “But I expect we are
lucky. It’s better than digging trenches or making munitions for Fritz.
Say, how’s your grub? I can’t go their black bread, can you?”

“No, it’s like eating straw, but they say we’ll get used to it. Did you
notice them eating jam on the meat and prunes with the spuds?”

“Yes. Mad beggars, aren’t they?”

I thought of the two cigarettes which I had saved for us to smoke
together and pulled them out. He grabbed one of them like a drowning
man grabs a life-preserver, and lit it.

“Here’s a cigar for you,” he said. “Cut it up and smoke it in your
pipe. I can’t go them. The boss gave it to me last night. He is the
mayor of the village, you know, sort of a toff. Came in the stall,
queer like, and says, ‘_Krieg_’--that means _war_, don’t it?--‘_Krieg,
nicht gut_, Albert,’ and he gives me this. ‘_Rauchen_,’[5] he says. I
think he must have been drunk.”

[Illustration: _Group of English Prisoners Working on the Farms of
Kossebade. The Author has a Pipe in his Mouth, and Albert, Mentioned in
Chapter VI, Stands at his Right_]

I told him about my own adventures, and we laughed together. He had
fared somewhat similarly, but he was a trained farmer and he got along
more smoothly with the work.

“I wonder what the boys in the bat would say if they could see me
wringing out shirts with Gretchen!” he said laughing.

“Or me sawing wood with Erna!” I added.

“Al-l-bert! Al-l-bert!” came a voice from the house.

“Well, that’s breakfast,” said Albert. “I’ll be going in. Isn’t it a
game, eh?”

“Aye,” I agreed, “Ain’t it a game! So long!”

“So long. See you after!”

After breakfast we went out for a walk and visited the other prisoners
in the village, especially the three other Englishmen, and the two old
Frenchmen who had been in the village since ’14. The five Serbians
formed a little group of their own and the Russians, some thirty-five
in number, formed another. The latter had one Sunday pastime,
_Einundzwanzig_. Month in and month out, some of them for two, three
and four years, they followed this monotonous existence--six days of
work and one of cards.

From that day until the armistice, we seven Englishmen and French were
fast friends, and every Sunday found us together. In the tavern, by the
village pond, or seated on the manger in some cow stall, we talked and
laughed and sang and longed for the Day of Deliverance to come.


FOOTNOTES:

[5] Smoke.




CHAPTER VII

_The Conquest of Erna_


As time went on I grew more adept as a farmer and bolder as my
increased efficiency justified. Even Erna ceased to terrorize me.
The latter relief dated from one morning in the cow stall when she
exasperated me beyond all patience by her sneering denunciation of the
“English swine.” I answered her as neatly as I could, but my broken
German only seemed to her the funnier, the more excited I became. It
reached a climax when she punctuated her argument by poking me in the
face with the broom. I struck out blindly and hit her somewhere, for
she fell screaming to the floor. I noted with satisfaction that I had
given her a respectable clout on the nose. The skin was all broken, and
presently it began to bleed. The blood frightened her into silence,
and from the terrified way in which she stared at me, I believe she
thought she was murdered. Indeed, I had some tremors myself, and we
were mutually pleased when she showed strength enough to get up on her
feet. She walked feebly through the barn to the backyard to let her
nose bleed.

I sprinkled some sand over the blood on the floor in the meantime, and
presently the little boy who worked on the place came in.

“I think you’ve killed her,” he observed solemnly, regarding me as one
would a murderer waiting for execution. “She’s bled about a liter!
They’ll hang you!”

Not particularly reassured by this cheering prediction, I paced back
and forth in the stall, meditating on the consequences of the deed. If
I must go to the gallows, I resolved to do it like a Sydney Carton or
a Nathan Hale. I was trying to think of the German for “I regret only
that I have but one life to give for my country,” when I heard the
familiar yell:

“_Frühstück-k-k!_” That was breakfast. I went in, but no Erna appeared.
I didn’t see her all day long. Heavens! I thought, she hasn’t vanished
altogether?

At last, at the supper table, I was put at ease. There, behind a huge
plaster, I saw the face of my old tormentor again, tearful and subdued;
but, thank God, alive!

They did nothing to me for mashing Erna’s nose. I explained it to
the sentry with a self-defence touch, and, _as he did not like Erna
himself_, he let me off with a reprimand and the usual admonition:

“Don’t forget that you’re a _Gefangener_!”

I learned from this affair that, aside from the protection which a
passing knowledge of German gave me, one could take a great many
liberties with these simple country people, if one only made a bold
face of it. On the other hand, the more one submitted to, the more one
had to endure. I knew an Italian who had to work almost every Sunday,
simply because he consented to work the first Sunday. I also knew of
several Russians who were imprisoned in pig-stalls and others who were
kicked and cuffed and slashed with knives by the same sentries who
guarded us and for smaller offenses than we were constantly committing,
but--until my attempted escape--none of the Englishmen there were
touched.




CHAPTER VIII

_For the Name of Old England_


The one great pastime of the Mecklenburg peasants was arguing about the
war with the prisoners. For us, it was impossible to avoid it. We were
placed there for the amusement of the natives as well as for toil, and
neither the utter ignorance of the subject on the part of the German
nor the ignorance of the native tongue on the part of the prisoner
furnished any immunity.

“_England, nicht gut!_” or “_England kaput!_”[6] was the usual
challenge.

New prisoners often found their rebuttal limited to a simple, but
vigorous, “Nay, nay, nay!”[7]

Older prisoners with a greater flow of language would gallantly defend
the name of old England in a tirade similar to the following:

“_Deutschland kaput! England nicht kaput! England besser! Ja! Ja!
Englische Soldaten kommen immer fester! Passe mal auf. Immer fester!_”

At first I tried serious argument, but this fell on barren ground.
They knew no facts and believed none which I asserted. For my part,
they thought it absurd that I should pretend to know anything about
the subject which they did not know,--a _Gefangener_ being a sort of
benighted heathen.

I sounded their ignorance, however, rather pointedly one evening. We
were seated at the supper-table and I found myself hotly assailed not
only by the five members of the household but a visiting aunt and uncle
as well.

“Germany is bigger than all the Allies put together,” announced Auntie.
“I don’t see what you all keep fighting for!”

“What _is_ the population of Germany?” I repeated.

They did not quite hear me.

“What _is_ the population of Germany?” I repeated.

I was looking at Auntie, but she was looking at somebody else and they
were all looking about as though they had lost something. Then someone
called on _Mutter_[8] to save the situation.

“Yes, _Mutter_ knows!” they said.

_Mutter_ suddenly decided to go into the kitchen for some more
potatoes, but she was trapped by Erna.

“Tell him, _Mutter_,” she urged.

_Mutter_ paused a moment and then:

“Joachim can tell you all right when he comes on leave!” she exclaimed
triumphantly as she went out of the door.

The Central Powers were winning again.

“Yes, and we’ve lots more hand grenades and things than you all!”
gloated Auntie.

“How many hand grenades?” I asked again statistically.

“Oh, hundreds of them!” she replied.

“Just how many soldiers have the Germans got?” I inquired a few minutes
later.

It was Erna who volunteered to reply.

“I know exactly. My brother told me and he’s an _Unteroffizier_! We’ve
six thousand and the English only three thousand! Twice as many! Why,
he saw two hundred soldiers in one town!”

This quite put the cap on it. It put an end, anyway, to any serious
discussion of the matter on my part. But talk I must, and not wishing
to see the name of England writhing in the dust, I tried to adopt
myself to the peasant style of argument. About a month thereafter you
might have found me entertaining my German companions in the fields in
this wise:

“Ha, Ha! We laugh at the Germans in London! We spit on them--the
monkeys! You’re fine _Kerls_--you black bread eaters, you cherry-leaf
smokers, you wooden-shoed pigs! Wouldn’t you look fine on the Paris
boulevard _in those_? _Was?_ _Ach_, we spit on the Germans! _Passe mal
auf_, _die Engländer_ are coming, and they shoot--So--and the Germans
will run--So--_Ja_, you’re _schön dumm_, you are!”


FOOTNOTES:

[6] Beaten.

[7] Mecklenburgish, _Ne_; German, _Nein_; English, No.

[8] Mother.




CHAPTER IX

_The Russian Peace_


“Oh, Ben, have you seen the papers?” asked Erna one day as I came in
for _Kaffeetrinken_. “Peace has been declared!--Peace!”

“_Was?_” I asked, dumbfounded.

“Peace! Peace has been declared! The Russians have made peace!”

“Oh!” I sighed, my hopes dashed to the ground. “I’ve heard that before.”

“_Ja_, but it is true,” corroborated _Mutter_. “It’s real peace! It’s
the beginning of the end. It’ll all be settled now in a few weeks!
Hostilities on the Eastern Front have ceased. There it is in the paper.”

She handed me the _Rostocker Anzeiger_ and they watched me while I read
the story of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. They expected me to dance
with glee at the joyous news and were keenly disappointed when I failed
to share their elation.

“Aren’t you glad?” asked _Mutter_, “It’s peace! Peace!”

“No,” I said. “It’s war, worse war and more of it!”

I read the paper with no little interest for the next few days, glowing
and optimistic and especially conciliatory toward the vanquished
Russians. The Russians were naturally clever and amiable people, who
had simply been the unfortunate dupes of wicked England. The hand of
friendship was again to be extended to the Slavonic brethren, and
all animosities inspired by the war were to be forgotten. Indeed, it
severely pained the tender heart of the Germans that they had been
compelled to kill so many Russians, and they fervently prayed that no
misunderstanding would ever again arise between the great German and
Russian races.

No reference was made to the treatment of the Russian prisoners,
for--there it stood in the treaty--they were to be “repatriated with
all possible speed!”

The helpless Russian _Gefangener_, however, already the most brutally
treated of the prisoners, were from that day reduced to a more abject
and wretched slavery than ever before. Cut off from all outside help
and with no government at home capable of protesting, they were
absolutely at the mercy of their German masters. They were overworked
and whipped or slashed or imprisoned whenever it pleased any particular
German to do so. In the camps and on the big working _Komandos_, they
begged, thieved, waited on the other prisoners for their food, or
else--starved.

The repatriation clause keenly interested the Russians in Kossebade.
The evening after the news came they gathered in joyous groups in the
village square and sang songs and congratulated one another.

A German farmer saw me watching them.

“Don’t you wish England had made peace,” he asked, “so _you_ could go
home, too!”

For weeks afterward the Russians talked confidently of going home.
“When are you going home?” was the usual greeting when we met one of
them.

“Don’t know, but soon!” was the reply.

Some months later I met my old neighbor, Ivan, now nearly four years in
captivity. We were ploughing two adjoining fields.

“When are you going home, Ivan?” I asked jocularly. It was the first
time that I had referred to it for a long time.

“I don’t know,” he answered smiling sadly, “I think mine is a life
sentence!”

When at last the armistice was signed and the French and Belgians and
all the rest of us were leaving, poor old Ivan was still there, and so
were his thirty-four comrades--still going wearily through the routine
of toil for their German masters, and playing _Einundzwanzig_ on
Sundays! The day of departure had passed into that realm of sweet, but
distant hope to which the Millennium belongs.




CHAPTER X

_German Lovers_


I was cleaning up in the stable one day when Miga rushed in with a
telegram in her hand.

“Ben, Ben!” she exclaimed, quaking with excitement. “Karl is coming
today!”

Who Karl was or what the matter had to do with me I couldn’t imagine.
“Where is Warner?” she asked.

I told her, and she rushed out to find him. Evidently it was something
which everybody had to know. I was interested. I rather liked Miga. She
had travelled a bit, and I put her down easily the most intelligent
member of the household. But who was Karl?

I soon had an opportunity of learning, for the boy August came in.

“Don’t you know,” he said winking. “That’s her beau!”

In due course Karl arrived, a smart young sergeant from a Dragoon
regiment. He spent two days with us and though he was almost constantly
with Miga, he frequently found time to joke with me about the mud on
the Somme, soldiers’ fondness for beer, the capitalist bandits, et
cetera; giving me a cigarette on each occasion. Like most soldiers from
the front, he had less of the air of superiority toward prisoners of
war than the civilians. He regarded the war as simply a rotten business
for all parties concerned and avoided talking seriously on any topic.

For Miga it was a happy two days. The night before his departure, he
went out to say goodbye to some friends, and she broke into tears.

“Silly, ain’t it?” observed Erna to me grinning, as Miga went weeping
to her bedroom.

Miga drove with him to the station the next morning and we all turned
out to see them off.

“Give my regards to my brother,” I said, “if you meet him on the
Somme.”

“_Ja wohl!_” he answered laughing, “I’ll fetch him over to keep you
company.”

He shook hands with everybody else and exchanged salutes with me. We
watched them drive away, and _Mutter_ stood silently at the gate long
after the trap had vanished in the distance.

I saw no more of Miga after she returned until the next afternoon--she
was confined to her bed with lovesickness. It was _Kaffeetrinken_ time
when she appeared again at the table. Her eyes were red and her cheeks
were swollen. She ate in silence until the rest had left the table, and
then waited to speak to me.

“What makes you men fight?” she asked slowly, gazing out of the window.
“Isn’t it horrible!”

“_Ja_,” I agreed, “Horrible beyond all words.”

“He might be killed! How cruel the _Engländer_ must be to kill such
boys as Karl. Don’t you think it is cruel--cruel--cruel?”

“War is cruel,” I conceded. It was useless to start an argument. “But
he’s been through three years of it all right, so why are you worrying
now? Besides, the war is bound to end soon,” I added hopefully.

“Why didn’t _you_ go and let him stay with me?” she demanded, clutching
at a childish idea. “You always say that you would rather be back there
fighting than here. What horrible mistakes the _lieber Gott_ makes! Why
don’t you go and fight in his stead and send him back to me?”

“I should hardly care to fight in his _stead_, Fraulein,” I said. I
could not give her any comfort so I arose and went out, leaving her
staring blankly out of the window.

She took me somewhat into her confidence after that, and often read me
letters from Karl. The first letter found him at a reinforcement camp
near Bruges.

“Pray God he stops there,” she said.

But he didn’t; for the end of March found him writing letters like
this: “We have crossed the Marne! Peace and victory are in sight. We go
forward with God!”

“Isn’t it noble!” Miga said.




CHAPTER XI

_Free for Three Days_


At last one summer’s evening they gathered around the supper table and
Ben failed to appear. I would give worlds to have seen the expressions
on their faces then, and on the sentry’s later when he came and found
no _Engländer_ there to lock up. I had come to seem too permanent
there! I was as much an institution on the place as the dog, Telo, or
the broken pump.

While they were making these rude discoveries I lay crouched on a bed
of moss in a secluded dell in one of the grand duke’s forests smoking
my pipe and speculating as to whether another fortnight would find
me in Denmark or in a German jail. I had just finished a good supper
of bread, “bully,” condensed milk, and dates from my box of English
provisions and was resting a moment before going on.

My linen collar wilted with perspiration and I threw it away, having
plenty more in my bag to put on in the morning. I had spent most of the
afternoon in putting together my civilian attire, for I had to escape
from the village in my prisoner’s garb. I carried patches of black
cloth in my pockets, accurately cut out to fit the prisoner’s stripes
on my cap and trousers. These I sewed on in the midst of a rye field
immediately I got clear of the village. My coat, I had found, would
not admit of alteration, so I had contrived to get another. I walked
into the little room adjoining the barn, belonging to Warner, the old
care-taker, and selecting the best of the coats hanging there, a gay
cream-colored creation, I put it on under my black one. Then I put two
suits of my new English underwear in a parcel under his bed, for I
did not care to steal from Warner. He had seen me thrash a German boy
without reporting it and had befriended me on various occasions. On top
of the parcel I scribbled a note:

  “DEAR WARNER:

 “This underwear is in exchange for your coat which I must take with
 me. _Danke schön. Auf Wiedersehen!_

  BEN.”


I spent most of the time tramping, stopping when tired or when the
view pleased me, for a rest, and sleeping in the middle of the day.
I passed through numerous villages and towns whose names I usually
learned from the mile-posts along the road. These were about ten feet
high and at night I had to climb up them and hold my eyes close to the
board to read the inscription. It was the first time I had spent the
night outside of my cell for many months and I enjoyed the sight of the
moon and the stars again. The long North German twilight was glorious,
too, and I often lay on some hillside above the fields and meadows and
villages, and watched it while I rested.

I was seldom accosted. I nearly ran into an old gentleman in a forest
on one occasion, however. He was a thin, academic-looking old chap,
wearing glasses and a frock coat, and carrying a cane. What brought
him to the forest at that unseemly hour I have never been able to
imagine. It was just after midnight and the darkness was so dense that
we could neither of us see the other until we were within a few inches
proximity, and the mossy earth so effectually concealed the sound of
our footsteps that we narrowly averted a collision.

“_Donnerwetter!_”[9] he screamed in a squeaky voice, throwing up his
hands and dropping his cane.

I was startled too, but finding him quite harmless, I bade him: “_Guten
Abend!_”[10] and, laughing, walked on.

Everywhere through this farming country I saw prisoners of war at work,
often more numerous than the German laborers. Like faithful slaves in
the small farmyards or like gangs of convicts on the big estates, they
carried on constantly the work of the absent German men and tilled
Germany’s soil. With dull and hardened faces and uniforms stained and
patched until Cossack was scarcely distinguishable from _chasseur_,
they drudged wearily on.

I was arrested by an animated scene on the rye fields of a big estate.
About thirty English, French, and Russian prisoners with a sprinkling
of Polish girls were harvesting and threshing the rye. The sun was
scorching hot, and their faces were black with dust and perspiration
as they bent over the big, relentless machine. The sole German on the
scene, a fat sentry, was sitting on a bench in the shade of a tree,
sipping a glass of beer!


FOOTNOTES:

[9] Exclamation about equal to “Good Heavens!”

[10] Good evening.




CHAPTER XII

_I Encounter a Don Quixote and Fall a Victim to His Prowess_


The success which I seemed to have with my civilian disguise gradually
led me to assume a bolder attitude. I began to stroll nonchalantly
along the main roads and even entered public houses and tobacco shops,
buying cigars and bottles of beer to drink with my meals. It was this
boldness which later caused my downfall.

It was the afternoon of the third day and I was resting beside that
fateful thoroughfare which runs from the village of Alt Pokrent to the
town of Gadebusch, when one of those dazzling creatures which belonged
to the mounted German _Landpolizei_ rode up. I had passed two of them
during the day without attracting any special attention, so I hoped to
be able to ignore this one and coolly lit a cigar.

I was looking the other way, but I heard tremulously as he drew up his
horse. I thought of flight, but a high bank stared me in the face. I
glanced timidly around. He was curling his mustache and gazing at my
feet.

“_Guten Abend_,” he began politely.

I wished him a “_Guten Abend_.”

Privately I wished him many other things.

“Are you--er--a traveller?” he began slowly.

“_Nein_, I am only going as far as Gadebusch.”

“Where is your home?”

“In Alt Pokrent,” I answered promptly.

Then he fired questions at me with bewildering rapidity.

“Work there?”

“_Ja._”

“On the estate?”

“_Ja._”

“Since when?”

“Seven months ago.”

“Cutting house or horses?”

“Horses.”

“Who owns the estate?”

I paused a moment and then thought of a Kossebade name.

“Herr Gottschalk.”

“Who’s the inspector?”

“Herr Warner.”

Then dramatically--“_Where did you get those boots?_”

I looked sheepishly at my tell-tale English boots--better than any to
be had in Germany.

“I bought them from----”

“_Ja, ja!_” he broke in. “We know all about that. They’re English boots
and the English don’t give boots to Germans. You told me a _schön_
tale! I know every man, woman and child in Alt Pokrent. You’re a Pole
or else an escaped Russian. Stand up! Stop smoking and take off your
coat!”

I obeyed and gave him Warner’s cream-colored coat. Not in the pocket
but in the lining, he found my wallet with a collection of keepsakes,
including a photo of a French _poilu_, a small American flag, and my
English Certificate of Attestation. He was quite puzzled.

“I don’t know,” he soliloquized, curling his mustache again. “You’re
something on the wrong side of the war. I am going to hold you for an
escaped prisoner. It will be better for you to tell me the truth.”

Convinced of his determination, I told him my story, and he took it
down in a little note-book.

“I don’t blame you, _Junger_,” he said. “I know what it is to be
homesick, but why don’t you English come to your senses and stop
fighting us?”

It is my firm belief that the natives of Gadebusch had proclaimed a
holiday in honor of my capture, for they were all standing out on the
sidewalks when we entered, my humble self trudging along in front with
my box of provisions and this gallant knight errant following, mounted
on his black charger and armed to the teeth. Sword, spurs, revolvers,
harness, and mustache were all polished to the highest degree. Indeed
he reminded me of a sort of Don Quixote as he glared fiercely from side
to side and replied majestically to the queries of the multitude in
regard to my nationality with: “_Engländer!_”

In short, his pose suggested that unanswerable question: “Why should
Germany tremble?”

I quite enjoyed the fun and grinned and stared brazenly back at the
Gadebuschers. My _gendarme_ was apparently bent on giving them all a
good look at me, for he marched me up one street and down another until
we had pretty well covered the town.

We ended up at the town jail; a charming old structure, overlooking
from the ground-floor, a pig-pen, and from the upper stories, the
ramshackle roofs of sundry adjacent houses. The landlord thoughtfully
relieved me of my burden of provisions as I entered and assigned me to
a cell on the second floor.




CHAPTER XIII

_My Entertainment at Gadebusch_


I hope I make an unchallenged assertion when I say that it was my first
visit inside a civilian jail. It was, at all events, an experience
which I do not wish to repeat. At first I worried through a few hours
examining the pictures and names carved on the walls. This exciting
pastime exhausted, I divided the remaining time between singing and
reading the old German Bible, which I found on the shelf, beginning
with first chapter of Genesis. My singing, too, was restricted to a
_sotto voce_ the second day when a voice from outside the door shouted:

“_Nicht singen! Nicht singen! Das geht nicht!_” But I think this
prohibition was due less to the rules and traditions of the institution
than to the peculiar quality of my singing.

Three times a day the old warden came in with a hunk of my bread, a
slice of my bacon, and a cup of German coffee. It was a concession,
he explained. I should have gotten only the coffee, but he had a son
who had formerly worked in England! It was lavish fare for this prison
at any rate, for several times every day one of the other prisoners
appeared at the little peep-hole in my door and begged:

“_Brot, Brot, Kamarad!_ Just a little crumb of _Brot_!”

I was not a little curious to learn what manner of men my comrades
in misery were. I was accordingly pleased the second night when I
gained an opportunity of improving our acquaintance. I was slumbering
peacefully on my downy couch when I felt myself being roughly shaken,
and a voice:

“_Engländer! Engländer!_”

It was my kind old warden.

“_Kom darunter--Blitzen!_”[11]

I obeyed him, wondering, slipping on my trousers and going downstairs.
I found my fellow prisoners to be two emaciated, but still professional
looking gentlemen of the underworld. The hall clock was striking two.
Having gone through the usual social amenities, I sought to learn what
object our gaoler had, beyond a general get-together meeting of the
inmates, in disturbing our repose at this unwonted hour.

“_Ach_,” explained one of them, who was hunchbacked, “That’s on account
of the lightning!”

We listened a few minutes until we heard a rumble of thunder.

“_Da!_” he exclaimed, “you see it might strike the jail, and if we were
all up in the cells we would die like rats!”

It struck me as a novel, but, I agreed, doubtless quite a wise
precaution.

I learned further that we three were all the prisoners. The
twenty-seven empty cells were a testimonial to the shattering effect of
the war on “business.” My companions were serving a sentence of eight
months for a robbery committed in the town.

“We don’t any of us belong to Mecklenburg,” observed the hunchback
pleasantly. “You see, my mate’s an Austrian, I’m an East Prussian, and
you’re an _Engländer_, so we’re sort of _Kamaraden_, aren’t we?”

“How jolly!” I thought.

A pause ensued, allowing us to hear the whistle of a locomotive and the
distant rumbling of a train coming around the bend--which bend I will
not say, for the sake of neutrality.

“_Da_,” murmured the hunchback pointing toward the door, “There comes
the old choo-choo!”

“There?” objected the Austrian aghast. He pointed toward the clock.
“That’s the way the train comes in. You’re forgetting yourself.”

“_Was?_” exclaimed the hunchback on the defensive. “I know where the
track lies--I came in that way. It’s just over there,” pointing again
at the door, “back of the pond.”

“Are you mad, _Mench_?”[12] retorted the Austrian, pointing again at
the clock, “Didn’t you just hear it come in _that_ way?”

Then followed one of the hottest little debates which I have ever
heard. Both men grew into a frenzy, and only the ties of long
friendship--constantly emphasized by the hunchback--prevented a resort
to physical force. When the old warden came in half an hour later to
tell us that danger was past, he found them stretched out together,
haggling over a map of Gadebusch, drawn with string and bits of paper
on the floor, a match stick representing the train. When I finally went
up to my cell, I could still hear the disgusted voice of the hunchback:

“_Aber_,[13] they don’t run locomotives over rye fields, _mein
Lieber_!”[14]

It was about noon of the fifth day and I was finishing the Book of
Isaiah, when the guard came to take me away. My warden did not forget
to exact a fee of six marks--being the amount of my hotel bill for the
five days, at a mark a day, according to Gadebusch reckoning.


FOOTNOTES:

[11] Come down--lightning.

[12] Man.

[13] But.

[14] My dear fellow.




CHAPTER XIV

_Kultur in a Train_


My new custodian was a fat, easy-going German, whom I found possessed
some of the most radical of revolutionary ideas, but like a vast number
of his comrades, too apathetic to trouble about carrying them out. We
passed a little display of wealth in the form of a smartly dressed
gentleman, lady, child and poodle dog, strolling down the street.

“They’re the bandits!” said my guard, nudging me. “They eat the butter
and eggs. We have to fight on dry bread and potatoes!”

It was through him, too, that I first learned of Marshal Foch’s great
offensive, though it was too young as yet to bring to us prisoners the
Great Hope. We were seated in the corner of a _Gastwirtschaft_ talking
over glasses of wine (for which he paid). The gramophone was playing:
“_Puppchen, du bist mein Augenschatz_,” or the German “Tipperary.” He
leaned over as if about to divulge a great secret.

“_Deutschland ist kaput!_”[15]

“_Was?_” I asked, astonished at the admission, for the German
newspapers had never been more optimistic than during the last month.

“_Deutschland ist kaput--kaput_,” he repeated, “absolutely _tot_![16]
The soldiers will turn against the bandits soon, for they are
starving! The food is finished--absolutely finished. We have
_nichts--nichts--nichts_!”[17] and he put his thumbs together and
jerked them quickly apart as though breaking a string.

“_Ja_,” I agreed, “but the offensive?” for the papers were still
gloating over the March success.

“The offensive?” he went on, “_Ach_, the offensive is doing splendidly!
They’ve captured fifty thousand prisoners! They’re going _immer fester
d’rauf_!” and he beat himself on the chest in illustration. “_Ach,
Lieber_, it’ll soon be over now!”

“I thought you’d captured one hundred and twenty thousand prisoners,” I
protested, puzzled.

“_Ach_,” exclaimed the guard, “This isn’t _us_, it’s the _French_!”

We had three hours to wait for our train, so he took me for a stroll
around Gadebusch. We visited two ladies who had sons in English and
French imprisonment. Both of them talked kindly to me and said that
their sons wrote pleasing accounts of their treatment at the hands
of the enemy. Later he took me to see another English prisoner in a
private home. It was a joy to meet him and speak the language again,
exchanging the stories of our varied adventures. He was “all right”
there, enjoying the privileges of a favored slave in the home, valued
by his master and loved by the children, for whom his broken German was
a source of never-ending amusement.

“Well, what are you going to do with him?” asked his master jocularly
of my guard.

“Don’t you want another _Engländer_, Annie?” he asked, turning to the
oldest girl.

“_Ja, Ja!_” shouted both the children at once.

Finding me agreeable, the old man and the guard immediately framed a
letter to the _Komandatur_ asking for my return to Gadebusch, when my
punishment was over.

We took a third class passage back to the camp at Parchim. It was one
of those long carriages with seats along the sides like a tram. A large
crowd boarded the train at Gadebusch, but we got in among the first
and managed to get seats. When the guard announced my nationality, I
promptly became the cynosure of neighboring eyes and the object of
innumerable questions, which he obligingly answered.

At the next station we received another influx of passengers, including
a number of females, the scarcity of the seats and the preoccupation
of the gentlemen occupying them forcing the latter to stand. This gave
me the opportunity for a cheap triumph, lessened somewhat by the fact
that there was no one beside myself to enjoy it.

I arose gallantly and grasped a strap.

“In England,” I said loud enough to be heard throughout the carriage,
“the men are glad enough to _stand_ when there are _ladies_ without
seats!”

I was the cynosure of piercing glares, but after an awkward pause, the
men of the “superior” race began one by one to follow my example.

I grinned inwardly, but my outward mien preserved the due humility of a
_Kriegsgefangener_, and my eyes rested on the distant fields.


FOOTNOTES:

[15] Germany is beaten.

[16] Dead.

[17] Nothing.




CHAPTER XV

_“Mad Alek” and “Good Paul”_


In the future annals of the war, one Acting Sergeant Major, Alexander
Schröder, chief of _III Kompanie_, Parchim _Gefangenenlager_, better
known to the Englishmen as “Mad Alek,” deserves a large but ignominious
chapter. His ludicrous air of blood-curdling bravado and his childish
efforts to play the role of the Chocolate Soldier make him as laughable
as his brutish cruelties made him an object of dread and hate to the
thousands of prisoners who passed through his hands.

We runaways, nine in number, were lined up in the _Büro_ to give up
our valuables before entering the Arrest Barracks, when this creature
swaggered in. He cut a dashing figure with the air of a champion in
feats of arms--_gained from combats with helpless prisoners_--and a
pair of polished spurs, a clanking sword and a fiercely up-turned
mustache completed the picture. Every prisoner and German sprang to
attention.

“What are these?” he demanded, pointing at us.

“Runaways, sir?” ventured someone timidly.

“_Was? Was?_ Runaways?” Then began a thrilling oration, illustrated
with the drawn sword, on the wretchedness and depravity of us all and
of all the foul races from whence we sprang.

“This man,” said the _Unteroffizier_ humbly, pointing at a Russian,
“has a complaint to make.”

With a trembling hand the Russian presented a letter signed by a German
lady. She testified to the brutal treatment which the prisoner had
suffered at the hands of his master, driving him to desperation and
flight.

“He _beat_ you, did he?” sneered “Mad Alek,” aroused to fury again.
“I wouldn’t have beaten you--not me! I wouldn’t have _beaten_ you. I
would have _killed_ you!” and he went through the movement with his
sword--“for the surly swine you are!”

The right to demand a writ of Habeas Corpus was never observed in a
German prison camp. Offenders were thrown into the arrest barrack and
began the _Hungerstraf_ immediately a complaint was lodged and trial
awaited the casual convenience of the officer of justice.

The _Hungerstraf_ I found to consist of confinement to a bedless and
fireless barrack on a diet of pure and undiluted water. There were no
other Englishmen there at the time, but I met a Belgian who kept me
agreeable company. He had been four days at large, sleeping, as he
said, in the hay-stacks, and making for Warnemünde where he had hoped
to board a Danish ship. He was a ’14 prisoner and had attempted escape
many times before. He seemed but a youth with the smooth face of a
girl, but he knew all the tortures of German captivity at its worst.

“I only want to get back and fight again,” he said bitterly. “I shall
run away again and again until I succeed, or die--or peace is declared!”

I was not long, however, in discovering some English neighbors. They
were in the Work Barrack, which adjoined ours, and to which we would be
conducted after forty-eight hours of fasting.

I was lying down composing the tentative menu for One Grand Feast when
I should be restored to freedom (as all men do when they are suffering
from hunger), when I heard a cheery voice:

“Any _Engländer_ there?”

“Any _Engländer_ there?” it came again.

“Yes, mate,” I shouted, and followed the voice to a knot-hole in the
wall, “K. R. R.”

“I’m Australian. How’re you getting on? Say, turn your stove around,
lad, and put your arm up to the chimney. I’ve some soup for you!”

I made haste to do as I was told.

“That’s right, Jack, right around. Now, get this!”

One chimney served for the stoves in both rooms, and by turning his own
stove around, he was able to get his arm through and pass me a “bully”
tin full of soup. It was rotten stuff, and mixed with soot from the
chimney but at the moment, it was better than the food of the gods.

“Good Old Auzzie!” I said fervently.

The next day I was carried before the officer of justice for trial.
Finding that I spoke German he dismissed the interpreter and as usual
in the case of prisoners with an appearance of education, gave me a
painstaking hearing. He wished not only to know the details of my
flight, but what college I had attended, what studies I had pursued,
and my general life story.

“You have broken German martial law,” he said gravely, in conclusion,
“and must be punished, but I shall make it light. I give you seven
days’ arrest.”

“But what about the seven I have already done?” I broke in.

“Ach, that wasn’t punishment,” he explained, “that was _hospitality_!
We couldn’t leave you in the street, you know. Seven days arrest,” he
continued, “subject to reduction to two on report of good conduct. You
will be sent back to the farm, and if you repeat this nonsense, I shall
deal severely with you. On the other hand, you may be assured of good
treatment until the end of the war--if you _do your duty_!”

“My duty!” I exclaimed. “My _duty_, _Herr Leutnant_, would be to poison
all the horses and set fire to the barns.”

He dismissed me laughing.

“_Das ist ja Krieg!_”[18] was his only comment.

The proposed return to Gadebusch had evidently fallen through. I
completed the _Hungerstraf_ and afterward spent a few extra days in the
work barrack before the guard came to take me back to the farm. The
ration in the work barrack differed from that in the _Hungerstraf_ in
that they mixed a few carrots and potatoes with the water and called it
soup. At all events it was calculated to give us the stamina necessary
for work.

We were marching out to work one afternoon when I was astonished to
see one of the Frenchmen in the party run up to the guard and embrace
him affectionately.

“_C’est toi, Paul!_”[19]

“_François! Mon vieux!_”[20]

But I recognized the guard and my astonishment was removed. It
was indeed Paul. “Good Paul,” as the Russians called him, a
French-Alsatian, as well known to the habitues of the detention
barracks as “Mad Alek” and as cordially loved as the latter was hated.
He had contrived to stay in the prison camp since the outbreak of the
war with the one object of smoothing the jagged edges of captivity for
Allied prisoners. Neither daily abuses from his German comrades nor the
constant risk of punishment for himself had deterred him. Many a man
will remember him gratefully for a timely rescue from wretched, gnawing
hunger, many a man owes his escape from a Komando, which would have
been equivalent to a death sentence to him, and the despondent hearts
which have been warmed by a friendly word and a handshake from Paul
would be difficult to estimate.

We had the job of loading peat on the trucks behind the camp. After
loading one truck, Paul, having explored the scene for official eyes in
the meantime, put François on sentry.

“You look out for _Unterofficieren_,” he directed, and turning to
the rest of us, “Sit down on the peat baskets,” he said. “Here are
cigarettes for some of you. And don’t any one work until I tell you!”

“Is there anyone here,” he asked presently, knowing our hunger, “who
has friends in the cage with food?”

“_Ja_,” replied a Serbian and I.

“Swap coats,” he said, “in case any of the guards know you, and push
that truck in the gate.”

I enjoyed a good tea with a sergeant of my regiment and we both
returned with pockets bulging with food, which we divided with our
comrades.

We were all warmly grateful to Paul.

“That’s only my business here,” he said, pleased.

Whatever else may be done at the Peace Conference, I want the Allies
to make a search of Germany and Alsace-Lorraine until they find one
Paul Sanchez formerly attached to _X Kompanie, Ersatz Battalion_ of
the German Army--a little man with a blonde mustache, and a kindly
face--and give him a Victoria Cross!


FOOTNOTES:

[18] That is indeed war.

[19] It is you, Paul.

[20] François, my Old Mate!




CHAPTER XVI

_The World Turned Upsidedown_


I will detain you little with my life on my second German farm, for I
was sent to a different one. One coincidence should be noted, however,
the lady for whom I now worked had a brother in England, captured near
Cambrai in the same battle in which I fell into German hands! This did
not alter her attitude toward me, and my treatment here was worse than
on the first farm.

My sentence of seven days’ arrest was to consist of seven consecutive
Sundays of confinement in my room, in the attic, without food. What
occasion I gave them for a report of good conduct I don’t know, but
the seven days were mercifully reduced to two. Having a liberal supply
of newspapers, tobacco and food concealed in my room and the German
serving girl bravely passing me jugs of hot coffee by means of a string
dropped from the window, I spent these two days quite pleasantly.

It was during my detention that I learned of great success of our
offensive and the probability of an early crash in Germany. From then
on I read the newspapers with feverish interest whenever I could get
them and made short translations on the backs of letters to be passed
to other Englishmen in the village, and to the other villages. I grew
restless and impatient as the rumors of capitulation and revolution
became more insistent. I couldn’t wait to read the papers. I longed to
hear and see more of the great things which were happening in the world
outside of our sleepy village.

At last I contrived to get as far as Parchim on the excuse of going for
a bath. My sentry took me in the morning and brought me back in the
afternoon.

On the train the passengers were talking excitedly, but in subdued
tones lest I should hear. A telegram was passed down the carriage. The
gentleman on my right carefully passed it _around_ me to the gentleman
on my left.

“For God’s sake let me see it, _Kamarad_!” I begged.

“_Nein. Es ist verboten._”[21]

I studied the back of the paper as he held it up to read it and made
out the word “Kaiser!”

“_Bitte!_[22] _Bitte! Kamarad_,” I whispered, “is the Kaiser gone?”

“Not yet, but soon!” he replied.

The Parchim Railway station was heavily guarded by the Badgeless troops
of the _Soldatenrat_.[23] In the camp I found the boys all merry and
bright. The signing of the Armistice was daily expected. Repatriation
by Christmas was conceived possible.

I gathered all the news I could from the English chaps in the baths.
A new regime had come in the camp. All the officers and all the most
notorious of the old bullies had fled, leaving the _Soldatenrat_ in
control.

“They found ‘Mad Alek,’” he announced.

“Found him?” I asked puzzled.

“Yes, he beat it, you know. Disappeared when they heard Bulgaria had
chucked it--took most of the garrison funds with him. They found him
last week in a forest near the Danish frontier. He’d hung himself.”

I returned to my farm, resolved to submit to no more restrictions, if
indeed to work at all. I could not help taunting my sentry and all my
favorite enemies in the village (who had so long jeered at me) over
Germany’s debacle. They had always regarded me as a “Smart Alek” and
now I exasperated them delightfully. My relations with the sentry
reached a climax one evening when he found me reading a newspaper by
candle-light in the barn.

“_Das ist verboten!_” he commanded.

“Who told you that, _mein Lieber_?” I asked, grinning condescendingly.

“Laugh at me will you? You swine!” He roared and before I was aware
he struck me a blow in the chest that sent me reeling. Aghast and
indignant I started back at him. Quick as a flash he had drawn his
bayonet and he struck my arm threateningly with the flat of it.

“Go to bed, you swine!” he ordered.

Confronted by cold steel, there was nothing to do but to obey. I
climbed slowly upstairs to my room, the German close on my heels,
striking me constantly with the bayonet to hurry me. I went to bed with
that wretched and maddening feeling of a man who has received blows
which he cannot repay. I could not sleep. I got up and sat down and
smoked until they unlocked my door in the morning.

[Illustration]

I resolved to go to Parchim the next day and seek redress from the
revolutionaries. I would see if the justice of which they prated was
a reality. I had to wait until dusk, for flight was still _verboten_,
and I must escape unobserved. Setting out in my English uniform with my
buttons brightly polished and carrying my belongings in a neat little
German haversack, I walked all the fifteen kilometers to Parchim,
arriving in the _Komandatur_ at about eight o’clock. I found all young
boys from the new movement in charge, and they listened to my story
with sympathetic indignation. I could not however, see the officer of
justice until the day after tomorrow, and being a runaway, I must spend
the remaining time in the detention barrack.

In this old house of misery I found every evidence of the “New Order.”
The _Hungerstraf_ had been abolished. I was permitted to keep my
cigarettes and tobacco. In the morning the guard asked me for the
address of a friend in the camp, and went out, returning with a cup of
hot tea and a generous meal! He repeated this performance three times a
day.

The new officer of justice was a studious looking young man from the
_Soldatenrat_. The point of my having run away he magnanimously waived,
and he carefully took down my charges against the sentry in a big book.
He promised me complete satisfaction.

“But when is this trial going to come off?” I asked, anxious to see
it through myself. “I want to be there and testify against him to his
face.”

“I am sorry,” he apologized, “but this matter must be referred to
the _Soldatenrat_. Your assailant will be arrested and the matter
thoroughly investigated, but it will take time. See me in a fortnight
and I will give you a good report of what has been done.”

“I hope to be in England in a fortnight,” I said resignedly, “so I must
trust you to see justice done.”


FOOTNOTES:

[21] It is forbidden.

[22] Please.

[23] Council of soldiers.




CHAPTER XVII

“_Auf Wiedersehen_”


A fortnight later found us in Warnemünde, awaiting embarkation. We were
quartered in the luxurious Naval Flying Corps Barracks, and living on
the fat of the land, but chafing and impatient for the old “Blighty”
ship. The natives of Warnemünde were obsequiously polite to the
_Engländer_ now. I was returning one evening to the _Flugplatz_ when I
was overtaken by a kindly-looking old lady.

“_Guten Abend, Junger_,” she said, smiling pleasantly. “They say you’re
leaving tomorrow. I suppose you’re glad you are going home?”

I told her I was.

“My boys will never come again,” she went on sadly, and she told me
about her three sons which she had sacrificed for the Fatherland.

“Now the nightmare is over,” she sighed, “and _Deutschland liegt
unter_!”[24]

Finally, as she grasped my hand before turning down another street:

“Tell them to be merciful on us,” she said. “Goodbye, and _bon voyage_!”

True enough the next day we marched down overloaded with kit and
souvenirs to board the ship and bade a final “_Auf Wiedersehen_” to the
Land of Captivity. Happy and excited we greeted the ship as a Goddess
of Liberty come to take us to a better land. Laughing and singing were
the order and with the unfailing humor of Tommy Atkins as we mounted
the gangplank arose the familiar strains of:

“... For this is the end of a Perfect Day.”


THE END


FOOTNOTES:

[24] Germany lies under (Germany is vanquished).




Transcriber’s Notes

Obvious errors in punctuation have been fixed.

Page 12: “bid them boodbye” changed to “bid them goodbye”

Page 23: “the Millenium belongs” changed to “the Millennium belongs”

Page 27: “wearing classes” changed to “wearing glasses” and “sound of
our foosteps” changed to “sound of our footsteps”

Page 29: “_Landpolizei_ road up.” changed to “_Landpolizei_ rode up”

Page 38: “up-turned mustacche” changed to “up-turned mustache” “chef of
III Kompanie” changed to “chief of III Kompanie”

Page 47: “are are going home” changed to “are going home”



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MEMOIRS OF A SWINE IN THE LAND OF KULTUR; OR, HOW IT FELT TO BE A PRISONER OF WAR ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Outside Saturn
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Outside Saturn

Author: Robert E. Gilbert

Illustrator: Richard Kluga


        
Release date: October 5, 2023 [eBook #71815]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: Royal Publications, Inc, 1957

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/71815

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OUTSIDE SATURN ***





                            OUTSIDE SATURN

                       By ROBERT ERNEST GILBERT

                     Illustrated by RICHARD KLUGA

            Gangsters were out of date, and the ice-sweeper
              was an unlikely thing to steal. But Vicenzo
              was a streak, so what else could Henry do?

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                        Infinity January 1958.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




                               CHAPTER I


Aziz ripped the radio from Henry's spacesuit and carefully resealed the
panel. "Dis'll be the weldin' of ya, kid," Aziz said, crinkling his
round, sallow face in an attempt to smile. "Yer name'll be in ever'
yap--in our orbit, dat is."

"But what--" Henry tried to say.

"No doubt at all," Vicenzo agreed, cleverly shorting Henry's drive tube.

"I don't--" Henry said.

"Vicenzo figured it right, kid," Aziz said. He gestured with powerful
arms too long for his short body. "Ya'll hit dat ole sweeper square on
the bulb. Vicenzo's a streak."

"I'm a genius," Vicenzo admitted. He smoothed the black bangs covering
his forehead to the eyebrows, and he fingered the pointed sideburns
reaching to his chin. "You jump into space, Henry, and then we'll
increase velocity and sink into the Rings."

Aziz begged, "Do us a blazer, kid. We won't go far. Too low on fuel."
He lowered the helmet over Henry's bushy, blond hair and ruddy face and
clamped it shut.

Vicenzo and Aziz left Henry in the airvalve and closed the inner door.
When the valve emptied to vacuum, Henry reluctantly lowered the outer
door and stepped to the magnetized platform.

Henry stood twenty meters above Ring B of the Rings of Saturn. Below
him, balls of ice, metal, rock, and assorted cosmic debris flowed
slowly past with stars occasionally visible between the whirling
particles. To either side, the billions of tiny moons blended with
distance to form a solid, glaring white band. Henry bent his knees and
dived into space.

Holding his body stiff with a practiced rigidity, and cautiously
moving arms and legs to check any tendency to tumble, Henry glided
above the Rings. Turning his head, he saw exhaust spurt from the
collection of spherical cabins, tanks, and motors that was the
spaceship; and the craft moved from his line of sight, leaving him
alone.

Henry drifted above a flat surface more than sixty-six thousand
kilometers wide. To his left, Ring B extended to the black circle of
the Cassini Division which separated it from the less brilliant Ring A.
To his right, the gleam of Ring B abruptly changed to the dimness of
the Crape Ring through which the surface of Saturn was visible. Of the
giant planet, forty-three thousand kilometers away, Henry saw but half
a crescent marked with vague white and yellow bands and obscure spots.

Red and green lights blinked ahead. Most of the approaching ice-sweeper
was shadowed and invisible against the blackness of space. Henry saw no
lighted windows, but he experimentally aimed his signal torch at a dome
on top of the space station.

Moving with the exact velocity of the Ring, the sweeper, a bundle of
huge cylindrical tanks bound together with fragile girders, apparently
grew larger. A rectangular snout, swinging from side to side and
probing into the Ring, dangled below the front of the sweeper. Dancing
in mutual gravitational attraction, the tiny moons constantly closed
the open lane behind the snout.

Henry blinked his torch and saw its red reflection in the sweeper's
observation dome, but no one answered the signal. Gaudy with lights,
the station drifted past below Henry's level and nearly one hundred
meters away.

       *       *       *       *       *

Henry struggled futilely in his suit and tumbled through space. He saw
the flaming arch of the Milky Way and then the immense shadow of Saturn
stretching black across the Rings. Somewhere, the bright exhaust of a
distant spaceship streaked across the stars.

By missing the ice-sweeper, he would continue on a spiral course down
toward Saturn, until he at last fell into the methane; or, if his
falling body accelerated enough, he might establish an orbit closer to
the planet and revolve around it, until he died of thirst. Vicenzo and
Aziz would never find him and would probably not search long.

Fire shot past Henry's gyrating figure. A thin cable followed the small
rocket. Henry's flailing arms struck the cable, and his gauntleted
hands gripped the strands. He pulled back the spent rocket, and the
missile's magnetic head clanked against his spacesuit. The lifeline
reeled him toward the station.

A hairless, brown, deeply wrinkled face watched Henry from a small
window beside an open airvalve. The cable pulled Henry to the muzzle of
a rocket launcher. He jerked the magnetic head loose and shut himself
into the valve. He slid the inner door open and, weakly kicking his
legs, floated on his back into the sweeper.

An old man, the owner of the wrinkled face, stopped Henry from drifting
into the far wall of the cramped compartment. The old man wore shorts
and a sleeveless shirt, and his shrunken limbs seemed to have no
muscles. He drew Henry down to the magnetized deck and removed the
space helmet.

"You're just a boy!" the man wheezed in a cracked voice. "Where'd you
come from, boy?"

Henry, watching through half-closed eyes, almost said that he was
twenty years old. Then he remembered to mutter, "Water."

The old man said, "How'd you get out here? There's been no ships in
days. What are you doing here all by yourself? I almost missed you.
You'd been on a bad course if I had. Just happened to see your torch
twirling around out there. Ain't many people can come that close with a
life rocket and not hit a fellow. For a second, I thought the rocket
was going to bust you. Of course, being skillful the way I am, it
didn't seem likely, but I--"

"Water," Henry moaned.

"Water? Why sure. How long you been drifting, boy? Must be mighty
thirsty. What's your name? I'm Ranjit. I've never got used to people
not telling their last names. Of course, even when I was your age, most
people called each other by their first names. I can't hardly remember
what my last name is. You might not think it to look at me, but I'm 107
years old. Here, let's get you out of that suit and see what kind of
shape you're in."

Horizontal and vertical wrinkles formed ragged crosshatching on
Ranjit's forehead. His nose and ears were large and grotesque with age.
He unsealed the spacesuit at the waist and, holding Henry against the
deck with one hand, pulled off the top section.

"Water!" Henry gasped. Peeping secretly, he saw that the teletype, near
the airvalve, was dismantled, with the parts tied in bunches floating
over the empty case. He located the radio above an aluminum desk in the
far corner. He could see no visular set anywhere.

Ranjit dragged off the lower section of the suit, leaving Henry
resplendent in orange knickers and red blouse. "How do you feel?"
Ranjit asked. "What ship are you from? I don't see how they could just
leave you. I'd better report this. They must be looking for you. Funny
I haven't heard about it. Of course, the teletype's out of whack. I'm
fixing it. I'm handy that way, fixing things. The heater broke down the
other day, but I've got it going good now. I've started melting ice
again. The tanks were about empty after that last ship fueled up. The
_Asteroid Ann_, it was, or was it the _Mimas Mae_? They've both been by
lately, but--"

"Water!" Henry pleaded. He had to do something to make Ranjit leave the
compartment. He tried to listen for sounds that would locate the other
crew members. Holding his handsome blond head in his hands, he sat up.
The movement lifted his body from the deck, leaving his metal-soled
shoes attached, so that he sat in mid-air.

"Water?" said Ranjit. "If there's one thing I've got, it's water. Let
me see, there must be a flask someplace." He rummaged in the netting
that covered two opposite walls of the compartment and secured an
incredible clutter of weightless tools, books, food cases, clothing,
oxygen tanks, spacesuit parts, wire, tubing, and other items. Still
talking, Ranjit vanished through an opening almost concealed by the
net.

       *       *       *       *       *

Henry leaped to the radio. He whipped a pair of insulated snips from
his pocket and cut through the electric cord in four places. He thrust
the severed pieces behind the desk and stood listening. Somewhere,
Ranjit continued talking, but Henry heard no answering voices. The only
other sounds were the whine of electric motors and the throb of pumps.
Henry pulled out a screwdriver and paused as he noticed a sign above
the desk. The sign said:

                         AAAAAAA CCCCC D EEEEE
                      G H IIIIH LLLL MM NNNNNNNNN
                       OO PP Q RR S TTTTT UUUUU

Shaking his head, Henry released the clamps, turned the radio, pried
off the back, and stabbed and slashed at the interior with the
screwdriver. He replaced the back and returned to his position on the
deck just in time.

"--really should," Ranjit continued, walking through the door. "You're
lucky I saw you at all. Of course, I'm watchful all the time. Would you
believe I've been right here on this sweeper for nine years? Here's
some water, boy."

Henry squirted water from the flexible flask into his mouth. Ranjit
said, "You ain't as thirsty as I thought you was. How come you wasn't
calling for help?"

"No radio," Henry mumbled. "The drive tube wouldn't work either."

"What were you doing in a bunged-up suit like that? You'll never
live to be as old as me if you take such chances. If this station
had visular, I'd have picked you up in that, but the company said I
wouldn't have no use for it."

"Where is everybody?" Henry asked, pushing himself unsteadily to his
feet.

"Everybody who? Are you hungry? How long since you had anything to
eat? There's nobody here but me. Karoly and Wilbur both passed beyond,
Wilbur just two weeks ago. He was only 94 too. The company's sending
some help, they say. I don't see how they expect one man to run an
ice-sweeper, even if he is handy like me. This is a dangerous job,
although you might not think so. Do you realize, young fellow, we're
whizzing around Saturn once every nine hours, four minutes, and twelve
seconds? That's an orbital velocity of nineteen point eight kilometers
per second! We've got to go that fast to stay in this orbit."

"There's no one else here but you?" Henry said.

"Think what would happen if something slowed us down!" Ranjit
exclaimed. "We'd start falling toward Saturn and finally crash!
Meteors are scarce out here, but what if a spaceship came around
retrograde and smashed this station head-on? There ain't a thing I can
do if it starts falling. Part of it's a ship, but the company took the
motor out. All I've got is the flywheel steering gear. The control
room's right up there above my bunk."

Ranjit pointed to a sandwich bunk hoisted against the pipes and
conduits that crisscrossed the ceiling in abstract patterns. He
said, "I can spin this sweeper like a top, if I want to, but I can't
accelerate it." He squinted through the small window beside the
airvalve. "Speaking of spaceships," he rambled, "there's one out there
now. Wonder who it is? There's not a thing on the schedule. Looks like
they would've called in."

Moving to the radio, the old man fumbled with knobs and switches
and pounded on the cabinet with his fist. "This radio's deader than
a asteroid!" he yelled. "First the teletype and now the radio. I'm
supposed to report all ships to Titan, but how can I with no equipment?
Maybe that's your ship come hunting you. What did you say your name is?"

"Henry," said Henry.

"Henry, huh? My name's Ranjit. I better get up to the big valve. That
ship'll be clinching in a minute."

"What does that sign mean?" said Henry, seizing the old man's bony
wrist.

"Sign? Oh, there over the desk? I just put that there to confuse
people. It's a puzzle that spells out something in an old-time
language, Latin maybe. Christian Huygens published that way back in
1655. He used a puzzle while he was checking some more. He was the
first man to figure out what was around Saturn. It means something
like, 'There's a flat ring that's inclined to the ecliptic that circles
the planet without touching it.' Well, let go of me. I've got to see
about that ship."

"Just stay here and be calm, Ranjit," Henry said.

"What?"

"Be good, and you won't get hurt."

"Get hurt? What are you talking about, Henry? That's no way to talk to
a fellow that saved your life. If it hadn't been for me, you'd still be
falling. You were slower than the sweeper. I saved your life!"

Henry blushed in sudden shame and released Ranjit's arm. "Why, why,
I--I guess you did!" he stammered.

Henry lived in an era that had been preceded by wars which destroyed
more than half the people of Earth. It was a time of rigidly
controlled population, highly specialized training, and constantly
increasing life expectancy. Each human life was considered a distinct
and invaluable thing. Since the end of the final war, the Crime
War, seventy years before, murder had become an obscene and almost
meaningless word, and natural death was rarely mentioned. Saving
another person's life was considered the most magnificent act that
anyone could perform, and almost the only way to become a public hero,
since actors, entertainers, policemen, and officials were thought to be
no better than anyone else.

"I'm--I'm sorry," Henry said, blushing until he perspired. "I'm all
mixed up."

"That's all right, Henry. You were out there a long time."

Something struck twice against the hull of the ice-sweeper. "There's a
clumsy pilot!" Ranjit yelled. "I better go see what he's trying to do."

"Wait," Henry said, grabbing the old man's arm again. "I--" He stopped
speaking and frowned in confusion. When he considered recent events,
he realized that Vicenzo and Aziz, by their inexpert maneuvering, had
almost caused him to pass beyond. All of Henry's education, haphazard
as it had been, emphasized the belief that a person who caused another
to pass beyond could only be regarded with loathing. A person who
saved a life must be treated with eternal gratitude and veneration by
the beneficiary.

Ranjit said, "Let's go, Henry! What are you up to? I've had a feeling
you ain't exactly zeroed."

"I--I think I should tell you," Henry said.

"Listen. Somebody coming aboard," Ranjit said, jerking his arm from
Henry's relaxed grip and facing the doorway in the netting. Henry
waited for Vicenzo and Aziz to enter the compartment.




                              CHAPTER II


Two people entered, but they were not Vicenzo and Aziz. The first was a
small, thin man with a long, sad face. He wore a somber black oversuit.
The second was a girl no older than Henry.

"Please, Joachim," the girl whispered, "don't antagonize them. Ask
about the fuel first."

Henry gaped at the girl, and his face grew hot. Since he had spent his
young life among the Moons and Asteroids, never going farther sunward
than Pallas, he had seen few girls his own age and none as beautiful
as this one. Her hair, dyed in tiger stripes of black and yellow, was
parted in the middle and, held by silver wires, extended from the sides
of her head like wings. She wore blue hose, silver fur shorts, and a
golden sweater sparkling with designs in mirror thread. Metal-soled
shoes too large for her feet slightly marred the total effect.

"High," said the man with the sad face. "I am Joachim, Second
Vice-President of the SPRS. This is our Corresponding Secretary,
Morna." His deep voice rolled around the compartment as if the lower
keys of an orchestrana had been struck.

"Low," Ranjit responded. "I'm Ranjit, and this is Henry. Why didn't
you make an appointment? The tanks are about empty, and you may
have to wait several hours. What do you feed your atomics, water or
hydrogen? It'll be even longer if you need hydrogen. I haven't done any
electrolysis today. I wasn't expecting--Look at that girl, Henry! I'm
107 years old, but I can still appreciate a sight like that! I don't
see how a homely fellow like you, Joachim, ever got such a luscious
girl."

"Ours is strictly a business relationship," said Morna with indignant
formality. "We do need fuel, Ranjit. We planned to refuel on Dione, but
the moon was not where Joachim thought it should be. If--"

"Later, Morna," Joachim interrupted in a hollow voice. "I have come
thirteen hundred million kilometers on a mission, and I intend to
fulfill it! I represent the SPRS. We have written to you, Ranjit, but
you have never answered."

Ranjit said, "The SPRS? Oh, yeah, you're the ones are always sending
me spacemail. It's about all I ever get, and I appreciate it. I don't
get much mail, out here, and I don't see many people. This fellow here,
Henry, was the first I'd seen in days. I saved Henry's life, or did he
tell you?"

"How wonderful!" Morna exclaimed in awe. "I've never spoken to a Saver
before! Think of it, Joachim! Ranjit saved Henry!"

"That is very nice," Joachim admitted, "but--"

"You're a hero!" Morna cried, seizing Ranjit's hands. "How does it feel
to be a Saver? It must be sublime!" She turned to Henry and grasped his
arms. "How do you feel, Henry? You must almost worship Ranjit! Such a
noble man!"

Ranjit cackled. "Look at him blush! I don't believe he's been around
girls much. Since Joachim don't have no claim on her, Henry, I'd do
some sweet talking if I was your age. I pulled Henry in on a lifeline,
or he'd be falling into the methane by now."

"Isn't that wonderful?" Morna marveled, smiling glamorously.

Joachim said, "Everyone be quiet and allow me to finish! I have come
thirteen hundred million kilometers on a mission, and I intend
to fulfill it! I am Second Vice-President of the Society for the
Preservation of the Rings of Saturn. You, Ranjit, and the people on the
other three stations in the Rings are destroying the most glorious and
inspiring feature of the Solar System! The divine pinnacle of Creation!
A miracle that may be unique in the Universe! You are destroying the
Rings of Saturn for the greedy, selfish purpose of selling fuel to
spaceships!"

"Spaceships got to have fuel," Ranjit said, "and don't talk so loud.
Ice is scarce, you know, unless you want to chase comets. One side of
Iapetus has a sheet, and Titan has some. If you go on in, you'll find
a little on some of the Moons of Jupiter, and a few of the Asteroids
are--"

Joachim said, "You are destroying the Rings of Saturn! This is the
most despicable crime in a long history of the devastation of nature
by greedy men! When you have eventually melted the last crystal of ice
and departed with your hoard, Saturn will spin desolately alone through
the night, shorn of his glorious halo that has been the solace and
inspiration of man since prehistoric times!"

"Not when they never had telescopes, it wasn't very inspiring," Ranjit
said. "I don't see why you're jumping on me, Joachim. I never answered
your letters because there wasn't nothing to say. I just work here.
You'll have to talk to the company to--"

"The Saturnine Fuel and Oxygen Company is headed by stubborn men!"
Joachim said. "They refuse to consider or answer our demands! That
is why I have come to appeal directly to the operators of these
ice-sweepers! You must immediately stop sweeping the Rings into your
tanks! You must tell your superiors that you refuse to destroy the
crowning glory of the Solar System!"

Ranjit said, "They'd just hire somebody else. I don't know as we are
destroying the Rings very fast. This was the first sweeper put in orbit
nine years ago, and I can't tell no difference in Ring B. There's an
awful lot of stuff in the Rings. Some of the balls are solid ice,
but some are just ice coated, so we melt it off and throw out the
core. Some don't have ice on it, so we throw it back. We don't use
hydroponics on the sweepers. We get plenty of oxygen when we take off
hydrogen, so we toss a lot of solid CO_{2} overboard, too. No, we ain't
taking as much from the Rings as you think. They'll get ionic motors to
working, one of these days, and it won't take hardly no fuel at all."

"Nevertheless, I believe--" Joachim tried to say.

"You've got a hard hull, anyhow," Ranjit said, "coming out here telling
me to stop when you need fuel yourself. Supposing I stopped right
now. How would you get away? And what would I do? I got a bad heart.
About half of it's artificial. That's why I've been living under zero
G for fifteen years. I can't go back to Earth. The docs say more than
four-tenths G would do for me. Before I got this job, I was living in
a hulk orbiting around Titan, just waiting to pass beyond. Now I got
something useful to do and something to live for. I may last till I'm
120."

Henry, who had been stupidly smiling at Morna with too much intensity
to follow the discussion, jerked his head around and gasped, "You, you
can't stand acceleration?"

Ranjit said, "Not enough to go anywhere. I got a bad heart, a very bad
heart. About half of it's--"

Vicenzo and Aziz, spacesuited, crowded into the compartment through
the doorway in the netting. "Dis is a stickup!" Aziz announced over a
loudspeaker on the chest of his suit.

"Don't move," Vicenzo growled, scowling beneath his black bangs.

       *       *       *       *       *

Since deadly weapons were extremely rare and difficult to obtain, the
pair had armed themselves with long, hand-made knives. Vicenzo also
carried a cumbersome rocket launcher, a remodeled lifeline tube.

"Gangsters!" Ranjit wheezed. "I ain't seen a gangster in twenty years!
I fought them in the Crime War! I--"

"Shut up, old man," Vicenzo ordered. His sideburns twitched around his
cruel mouth. "Everything fixed here, Henry?"

"Are you into this, Henry?" Ranjit said.

Vicenzo snarled, "I told you to shut up!"

"Let me talk to you alone, Vicenzo," Henry said.

"Spill it now. Is this all the crew? Did you smash communications?"

"Yes," Henry admitted. "The old man is the crew. The others just came
aboard."

"Why didn't you fix the other ship?" Vicenzo said. "We had to clamp on,
because it was blocking the valve. We came through it, and you hadn't
even smashed the radio. There might've been a crew aboard, for all you
knew."

"Vicenzo's a streak, kid," Aziz said. The short, wide man's sallow face
looked horrible behind the faceplate. "You oughta done like Vicenzo
said," he advised. "You won't get nowhere goofin' like dat or--Hey,
take a check on the doll! I never thought to see nothin' like dat on a
sweeper! Lucky me!"

"She's not in this," Henry said. "She's from the other ship. Leave her
alone, Aziz."

"Don't yap at me like dat, kid," Aziz warned.

Morna, who had stood as if frozen, turned to Henry and squealed,
"You're a gangster? How awful, after I thought you were nice, letting
Ranjit save your life!"

"Shut up, girl," Vicenzo said.

"A gangster!" Morna shrieked. She slapped Henry twice across the face,
knocking his shoes loose from the magnetic deck. He flipped and fell
against the net with his feet touching the ceiling.

In the confusion, Joachim broke from his terrified trance and dived
through the door. "I'll get 'im!" Aziz roared and, waving his knife,
followed the fleeing Second Vice-President.

As Henry struggled to regain an erect position, Morna wailed in his
ear, "I thought you were good and handsome, but you're a gangster! You
didn't deserve to be saved!" She slapped him again, knocking him to
the deck, and began to weep wildly. Under no gravity, the tears spread
in a film across her face. Surprised, she stopped crying and wiped her
cheeks with her hands. A few tears flew into the air as shimmering
globes.

Joachim floated into the compartment. His long chin was bruised, and
he muttered, "Save the Rings!" Aziz, grinning, followed and stood on
guard before the door. Morna gasped, darted to her employer, and made
helpless gestures.

"All right, now," Vicenzo said. "Let's get this jaunt moving. Henry,
tie these cubes up and--"

"We can't do it, Vicenzo," Henry said, staring in horror at Joachim's
half-conscious body.

"What?"

Henry said, "It's the old man. His heart's bad. The acceleration would
k-kill him!"

"Dat's the chance he's gotta take," Aziz sneered.

"You mean you don't care if you m-murder someone?"

"It's all in the orbit," Vicenzo said. "I told you that when you
clinched with us."

"I didn't believe you," Henry said. "You can't hurt Ranjit! He saved my
life!"

"Dat's what he was supposed to do, so's ya could get aboard," Aziz said.

"But he really did save me! He pulled me in on a lifeline. I would've
missed the station. I wouldn't be surprised if you two tried to
m-murder me! I'm checking out. The whole deal's off. Both of you get
back in the ship and go! I'll give you that much of a chance. I'll stay
here and take Revision, or whatever's coming to me."

"The kid's stripped his cogs," Aziz laughed through his loudspeaker.

Vicenzo aimed his rocket launcher at Henry's midriff. He growled, "Too
bad you turned cube, Henry."

"Don't fire that thing in here!" Ranjit yelled. "You'll blow a hole
through the hull! What are you fellows up to? I never saw such mixed-up
goings on."

       *       *       *       *       *

Henry said, "They're going to steal the ice-sweeper. That's why I had
to be taken aboard, so I could wreck your equipment and keep you from
reporting us or calling the other stations. The sweeper is supposed
to vanish without a trace. I'm sorry I ruined your radio, Ranjit. I
was supposed to try to keep the crew from becoming suspicious while
Vicenzo and Aziz were clinching. They're going to move the sweeper into
a Sun orbit, somewhere, and use it for a base. They're going to hijack
spaceships."

"Of all the crazy schemes!" Ranjit snorted. "You gangsters are space
happy! You're ready for the psychodocs! You can't get away with
gangstering these days! I fought your grandfathers in the Crime War.
I was in the Battle of Jupiter Orbit. We whipped you good, and nearly
wiped you out, but, ever so often, a few of you still turn up and try
silly stuff like this. Solar Government will get you!"

Vicenzo said, "Shut up, old man! Aziz, hold the girl. If the rest of
you don't behave while I'm tying you, Aziz will stab her."

"Dat'd be a awful waste," Aziz said, twisting Morna's arms behind her
back. Morna began to cry again. Teardrops floated like tiny planets.

Vicenzo pulled a long cord from his pack and lifted Joachim with one
hand. "Save the Rings," Joachim mumbled. "You are desecrating the glory
of the Solar System." Vicenzo lashed Joachim's wrists to an overhead
pipe.

Vicenzo said, "All right, Henry, you and the old man put your hands
against that pipe."

Ranjit said, "I'm 107 years old, but never in my life--"

"I'm going to shut you up, if you don't do it yourself," Vicenzo
promised. He secured Ranjit beside Joachim and then started tying
Henry's wrists to the pipe.

"Be careful what you do to the sweeper, Vicenzo," Henry begged. "Ranjit
was telling me how dangerous it is. If anything causes the velocity to
drop, we'll fall on Saturn."

"You think I'm stupid? That's the way with anything in an orbit. The
closer to a planet, the faster you've got to go. Bring the girl, Aziz."




                              CHAPTER III


Morna struggled and kicked the spacesuits while Vicenzo tied her next
to Henry. Aziz said, "You think there's really a chance of us fallin'?
I'd hate to plop in all that methane."

"No," said Vicenzo. "Old man, where's the control room? We're moving
this whole station with the two ships clamped on."

"Hadn't we oughta put some water in our tanks, in case we gotta scram
quick?" Aziz asked. "They're about empty."

Ranjit chuckled. "You'll have to wait four hours to tank up. I just
got the heater going a while ago. There's an SG ship due in soon. You
better give up."

"You're lying in strings!" Vicenzo said. "You must have fuel for the
sweeper's motors. Where's the control room?"

"I ain't saying."

"He'll tell," Aziz gloated, raising his knife.

"We can find it quicker," Vicenzo said and turned away. Aziz followed
him through the door.

"What?" Joachim muttered. "Where? The gangsters!" He stared around the
compartment and cried, "There is one! Henry is a gangster! You are
also, Ranjit! I have long suspected that the destruction of the Rings
of Saturn could only be the work of gangsters! No one--Morna! Are you
injured?"

"No," Morna blubbered. "Stay away from me, Henry!" One of her wings of
black and yellow hair had fallen over her face.

"Sorry," Henry said, blushing and moving his legs. "I didn't notice
which way I was drifting."

Joachim said, "Where are the other gangsters? Have they gone to steal
my ship? It is rented! The SPRS would never recover if we had to pay
for the ship!"

"Let's figure some way to get loose," Ranjit suggested. "Those fellows
won't find the control room out there. No motors, anyhow, but all
they've got to do is wait till enough fuel melts and use their ship to
move the sweeper. Think how that'd look on my record."

"You said an SG ship would be here in a few minutes," Morna objected.

"I was just telling them that. There's no ship due for two days."

"You actually told a falsehood?" Morna gasped.

Ranjit said, "When you get to be my age, you'll find you can do lots
of things they didn't teach in school. How'd you clinch up with two
fellows like them, Henry? They're space happy, both of them. Didn't you
have no education?"

"Not much," Henry said. "Me and my parents were shipwrecked in the
Asteroids when I was only ten. Mother tried to teach me Honesty, and
Morality, and all the rest, but it didn't take very well. We were there
eight years before we were picked up. They put me in school, then, with
a bunch of kids. I didn't like it, so I skipped and worked in the mines
on Titan. Then I got mixed up with Vicenzo and Aziz. This is the first
job I've pulled with them."

"At least you changed your mind and tried to stop it," Ranjit said,
tugging at his bonds.

"The snips!" Henry exclaimed. "There's a pair of snips in my side
pocket. Maybe you can reach them, Ranjit, if I--No, they're on the
wrong side. Morna, will you try to get them if I can put my, uh, pocket
next to your hand?"

"Stay away from me," Morna said.

"You've got to." Henry braced his feet against the deck and pushed,
bending his knees as his weightless body flew into the air. He twisted,
and the side of his left leg struck the ceiling. Shoving with his toe,
he forced his contorted body back toward the pipe. "There!" he grunted.
"Can you reach them?"

Morna said, "I don't know. My wrists are tied so tight." Her hand
touched Henry's hip and sent him swinging in the opposite direction.
His legs stopped across Ranjit's chest. The old man lowered his head
and butted Henry back toward Morna.

"Oh, get out of my face!" Morna complained.

       *       *       *       *       *

Henry lay against the ceiling with his legs bent, his back bowed, and
his left elbow pressed against his lower ribs. Morna's hand fluttered
at his pocket. "I've got--No, it's a screwdriver," she said. "Now, I've
got the snips!"

"Don't drop them," Henry pleaded. He thrust his feet back to the deck.
"Try to cut the line around my wrist. Ow! That's my hand!"

"Be brave!" Morna jeered nervously. "Now it's under the cord. I cut
one!"

Henry twisted his wrist in the loosened cord and pulled his left hand
free. He said, "Thanks. Give me the snips."

Morna said, "Promise to cut me down first. I don't want to be tied with
you loose."

Henry snatched the snips from her and cut the line binding his right
hand. Morna said, "Gangster trick."

"Hurry up, Henry," Ranjit said. "Those fellows will be coming back."

Henry released Ranjit and Joachim. "Cut me loose!" Morna yelled.

"Not so loud," Henry said, freeing her. "Go up in the control room,
Ranjit. You told me you still had flywheel steering. If it won't hurt
you, you can make them think you're decelerating. It'll confuse them,
at least."

"Yeah," Ranjit chuckled, "that's a bright idea. I was about to think of
it myself."

Henry said, "Morna, you go with Ranjit. Joachim, you stay with me, and
we'll waylay them. We'll find something for weapons."

Ranjit pulled the sandwich bunk down on its rods, crouched on the bunk,
and pushed open the overhead hatch. Joachim said, "I do not intend to
engage in a brawl with gangsters. Come, Morna, let us take our chances
in our own ship. We--"

"I hear them out there!" Henry said.

Joachim squeaked, bounded to the bunk, and sprang through the hatch.
"Bet he bumped his head," Ranjit hoped. "Up you go, Morna. Strap
yourself to a couch."

Morna climbed on the bunk and through the hatch. Ranjit followed, "It's
a trick," Morna said. "He'll be alone with his gangster friends."

"There's a set of spanner wrenches right there in the net," Ranjit
said, pointing. "There's a roll of wire over yonder." He closed the
hatch.

       *       *       *       *       *

Henry raised the bunk back to the ceiling. He fumbled in the
accumulation behind the netting, throwing out a case of canned beans,
a one-volume encyclopedia, a bundle of papers, and a broken clock.
He found the wrenches and selected a large one half a meter long. He
searched again, pulled out a coil of electric cable, and stuffed it
under his belt. Jumping across the compartment, he clung to the net
above the door.

Vicenzo and Aziz had not turned off their loudspeakers. "Nothing but
tanks and ladderchutes," Vicenzo was saying. "There has to be a control
room somewhere."

Aziz said, "Maybe there's another door behind all the junk in there.
I'll get it outta the old man."

As Vicenzo's spacesuited figure appeared below in the doorway, Henry
swung his arm. The spanner clanged against the back of Vicenzo's
helmet. The man tumbled across the compartment into the netting. The
rocket launcher whirled from his hands, struck the ceiling, and bounced
to the deck.

Slashing upward with his knife, Aziz twisted into the compartment.
Henry met the thrust with the spanner and knocked the knife from the
squat man's hand. Aziz bellowed, "Ya greasy cube! I'll squash ya!"

Aziz swung his gauntleted fist. Henry struck Aziz across the arm with
the spanner, denting the metal of the spacesuit. Vicenzo jerked his
head from a box and roared, "Get him! He busted my skull!"

Henry jumped from the net to the corner beside the desk. The two men
slowly stalked him. Vicenzo had his knife, and Aziz experimentally
flexed his metal-sheathed hands.

"We're going to fix you, Henry," Vicenzo promised. "You're just a
little smarter than you should be."

"He ain't smart atall," Aziz growled. "What for did ya want to turn
cube, Henry? I told ya yer name'd be in ever' yap, if ya stuck with us.
Now, nobody'll know ya when I get done."

Henry debated with himself, trying to decide if the situation justified
a falsehood. He said, "Get away while you can! Ranjit says he'll crash
this sweeper before he'll let you steal it! He's in the control room
now."

Aziz stopped and glanced around. "Ya think he will?" he asked.

"No," Vicenzo said. He circled to Henry's left.

Henry raised the spanner and kept his eyes on Vicenzo's knife. Aziz
moved to Henry's right. The deck seemed to tilt. Henry clutched a leg
of the desk to keep from falling.

Vicenzo and Aziz, waving their arms, leaned at an increasingly acute
angle. Their boots broke from the magnetic deck. They fell slowly,
accelerating at about two meters per second, and dropped into the
netted wall which had become the floor.

Henry dangled below what was now the ceiling. Objects fell from the
net beside him. Tools, machine parts, books, and canned food slowly
showered down on Vicenzo and Aziz, who thrashed and swore in the
growing junk heap.

"We're deceleratin'!" Aziz yelled. "That old man really is gonna kill
us! We'll crash on Saturn!"

"That hatch over the bunk!" Vicenzo said as he tried to stand. "That's
where they went! The control room!" A box of cans emptied over his
helmet.

"We're fallin'!" Aziz yelled. "It's forcin' us to the front of the
station! Let's get out!" He stumbled through the litter toward the
airvalve which was now up one wall.

Vicenzo said, "Look out that window! The stars are streaking! He's just
spinning the sweeper! It's centrifugal force!"

"It's deceleration!" Aziz insisted, jumping at the airvalve. The
dismantled teletype slipped from its clamps and fell on the man's head.
He slid back down the wall.

Beside Henry, the net broke loose. A slow, miscellaneous rain,
including two sandwich bunks and part of a spaceship landing leg, fell
on Vicenzo and Aziz. Henry felt the desk slipping. He dropped on his
feet in the clutter. The desk clattered down beside him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Stumbling and staggering, Henry reached Vicenzo, who struggled under a
bunk, a plastic packing case, part of a pump, and a bundle of tubing.
Henry took the electric cable from his belt and formed a loop. He drew
the loop tight around Vicenzo's arms. Vicenzo pushed the case off his
legs and tried to stand. Henry flipped the cable around and around
Vicenzo and bound his arms to his sides.

"Get him, Aziz!" Vicenzo called in rage. Henry tied Vicenzo's feet
together and cut off the remaining cable with his snips.

Aziz had grasped the frame of the airvalve and was trying to slide the
door open. Henry selected a battered oxygen tank from the heap, lifted
it in both hands, and hurled it. The missile caught Aziz across the
back of his spacesuit. He fell into the jumbled equipment on the floor.
Quickly, Henry repeated his looping and tying operations. Then he sat
on an empty trunk and tried to slow his rapid breathing.

"Le'me go, Henry!" Aziz demanded, somewhat dazed. "We're fallin'!"
Henry opened the switch on the spacesuit's loudspeaker.

The bunk in the wall that had been the ceiling unfolded, and Ranjit's
wrinkled face peeped through the exposed hatch. "What a mess!" he
chuckled. "Things wasn't fastened down like they should of been. Of
course, it never needed to be before. I never knowed--"

"How are you standing the gravity?" Henry panted.

"It's just two-tenths G," Ranjit said. "Hang on, and I'll take us back
to no weight. This old sweeper's spinning like a top."

Ranjit's head withdrew. Henry tried to find a handhold in the pile of
material. His feet left the tangle. Accompanied by assorted items,
including the bound figures of Vicenzo and Aziz, he floated in the air.

Twisting, Henry placed his feet on the magnetized deck. Objects
containing steel settled around him. He pulled Vicenzo and Aziz
down, and, as Vicenzo began to curse in ancient terms, silenced his
loudspeaker also.

Joachim appeared clutching his stomach. "I shall wait in my ship
for the fuel," he gagged, dodging a floating chest, "away from this
criminal madhouse!"

Morna and Ranjit dropped into the compartment. Ranjit kicked aside
a crate and said, "Good, Henry. I guess you saved our lives, or
mine anyhow. Those fellows would have passed me beyond if they had
accelerated the sweeper, and you sure kept them from stealing it."

"He did all right for a gangster," said Morna on her way to the door.

"Wait, Morna, please," said Henry. He blushed a bright red. "Won't,
won't I ever see you again?"

"Why would I want to see a gangster again?"

Ranjit said, "He's not much of a gangster, and he changed his mind. Of
course, those two will tell about his part in this, and Joachim's sure
to report it. SG will ship you to Earth, Henry, for Revision, but that
won't be too bad, just a sort of school, and you're good as Revised
already, the way you acted."

Henry looked at Morna. "I'd like to go to Earth," he said.

"Tell you what," Ranjit said. "It'll be three hours before there's
enough fuel for Joachim's ship. Why don't you two go up to the dome and
see the sights, and forget all this? We'll be passing into the Shadow
in about ten minutes, and you'll see one of the prettiest things there
is, Saturn from the dark side. The atmosphere looks like a gold rainbow
above the Rings."

Morna stared at the deck. The corners of her mouth curved upward. She
said, "I'm sorry I slapped you, Henry."





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OUTSIDE SATURN ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Song in a Minor Key
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Song in a Minor Key

Author: C. L. Moore


        
Release date: April 10, 2009 [eBook #28550]
                Most recently updated: January 4, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/28550

Credits: Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONG IN A MINOR KEY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









    _Northwest Smith is one of the great adventurers of Science Fiction,
    one of that group of cool, gray-eyed men who roam the spaceways and
    provide much of the inspiration for the legends that are a part of
    the folklore of space. Here is Northwest Smith, in a rare moment of
    peace, in a remarkable vignette, published here by permission of the
    author._


  song
    in
     a
 minor
   key

 _by ... C. L. MOORE_


 He had been promising himself this moment for how
 many lonely months and years on alien worlds?


Beneath him the clovered hill-slope was warm in the sun. Northwest Smith
moved his shoulders against the earth and closed his eyes, breathing so
deeply that the gun holstered upon his chest drew tight against its
strap as he drank the fragrance of Earth and clover warm in the sun.
Here in the hollow of the hills, willow-shaded, pillowed upon clover and
the lap of Earth, he let his breath run out in a long sigh and drew one
palm across the grass in a caress like a lover's.

He had been promising himself this moment for how long--how many months
and years on alien worlds? He would not think of it now. He would not
remember the dark spaceways or the red slag of Martian drylands or the
pearl-gray days on Venus when he had dreamed of the Earth that had
outlawed him. So he lay, with his eyes closed and the sunlight drenching
him through, no sound in his ears but the passage of a breeze through
the grass and a creaking of some insect nearby--the violent,
blood-smelling years behind him might never have been. Except for the
gun pressed into his ribs between his chest and the clovered earth, he
might be a boy again, years upon years ago, long before he had broken
his first law or killed his first man.

No one else alive now knew who that boy had been. Not even the all
knowing Patrol. Not even Venusian Yarol, who had been his closest friend
for so many riotous years. No one would ever know--now. Not his name
(which had not always been Smith) or his native land or the home that
had bred him, or the first violent deed that had sent him down the
devious paths which led here--here to the clover hollow in the hills of
an Earth that had forbidden him ever to set foot again upon her soil.

He unclasped the hands behind his head and rolled over to lay a scarred
cheek on his arm, smiling to himself. Well, here was Earth beneath him.
No longer a green star high in alien skies, but warm soil, new clover so
near his face he could see all the little stems and trefoil leaves,
moist earth granular at their roots. An ant ran by with waving antennae
close beside his cheek. He closed his eyes and drew another deep breath.
Better not even look; better to lie here like an animal, absorbing the
sun and the feel of Earth blindly, wordlessly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now he was not Northwest Smith, scarred outlaw of the spaceways. Now he
was a boy again with all his life before him. There would be a
white-columned house just over the hill, with shaded porches and white
curtains blowing in the breeze and the sound of sweet, familiar voices
indoors. There would be a girl with hair like poured honey hesitating
just inside the door, lifting her eyes to him. Tears in the eyes. He lay
very still, remembering.

Curious how vividly it all came back, though the house had been ashes
for nearly twenty years, and the girl--the girl ...

He rolled over violently, opening his eyes. No use remembering her.
There had been that fatal flaw in him from the very first, he knew now.
If he were the boy again knowing all he knew today, still the flaw would
be there and sooner or later the same thing must have happened that had
happened twenty years ago. He had been born for a wilder age, when men
took what they wanted and held what they could without respect for law.
Obedience was not in him, and so--

As vividly as on that day it happened he felt the same old surge of
anger and despair twenty years old now, felt the ray-gun bucking hard
against his unaccustomed fist, heard the hiss of its deadly charge
ravening into a face he hated. He could not be sorry, even now, for that
first man he had killed. But in the smoke of that killing had gone up
the columned house and the future he might have had, the boy
himself--lost as Atlantis now--and the girl with the honey-colored hair
and much, much else besides. It had to happen, he knew. He being the boy
he was, it had to happen. Even if he could go back and start all over,
the tale would be the same.

And it was all long past now, anyhow; and nobody remembered any more at
all, except himself. A man would be a fool to lie here thinking about it
any longer.

Smith grunted and sat up, shrugging the gun into place against his ribs.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ January 1957.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of Project Gutenberg's Song in a Minor Key, by Catherine Lucille Moore



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONG IN A MINOR KEY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


