The Project Gutenberg eBook of The history of the condition of women in various ages and nations
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The history of the condition of women in various ages and nations
        Vol. 1 (of 2), Comprising the women of Asia and Africa

Author: Lydia Maria Child


        
Release date: August 14, 2023 [eBook #71406]

Language: English

Original publication: Boston: Otis, Broaders & Co, 1835

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/71406

Credits: The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY OF THE CONDITION OF WOMEN IN VARIOUS AGES AND NATIONS ***





                                  THE

                                HISTORY

                                 OF THE

                          CONDITION OF WOMEN,

                      IN VARIOUS AGES AND NATIONS.

                                   BY

                           MRS. D. L. CHILD,

          AUTHOR OF “MOTHER’S BOOK,” “FRUGAL HOUSEWIFE,” ETC.


                     I am a slave, a favored slave
          At best, to share his splendor, and seem very blest;
              When weary of these fleeting charms and me,
            There yawns the sack, and yonder rolls the sea.
                What! am I then a toy for dotard’s play,
      To wear but till the gilding frets away?--_Byron’s Corsair._


                                VOL. I.

                COMPRISING THE WOMEN OF ASIA AND AFRICA.

                             THIRD EDITION.

                                BOSTON:
                          OTIS, BROADERS & CO.
                                 1840.




     Entered according to the Act of Congress, in the year 1835, by
                            JOHN ALLEN & CO.
     in the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of Massachusetts.

                                BOSTON:
                 STEREOTYPED BY SHEPARD, OLIVER AND CO.
                          No. 3 Water Street.




                          CONTENTS TO VOL. I.


                                                                   PAGE.

Afghanistan                                                           43

Africa                                                               245

Amazons                                                              176

Amboyna                                                              202

Arabia                                                                36

Armenia                                                               48

Assyria                                                               23


Babylon                                                               23

Bali                                                                 203

Barbary States                                                       232

Bedouin Arabs                                                         38

Birmah                                                               133

Borneo                                                               199


Caria                                                                 28

Carthage                                                             231

Celebes                                                              201

Ceylon                                                               186

China                                                                143

Circassia                                                             44

Cochin China                                                         137

Corea                                                                160

Courdistan                                                            42


Druses                                                                34

Dutch settlers in Africa                                             298


Egypt                                                                216

Fox Islands                                                          214


Georgia                                                               47


Hindostan                                                             86

Hottentots                                                           287


Japan                                                                212

Java                                                                 187

Jews                                                                   1


Kurile Island                                                        215


Loo Choo                                                             210

Lycia                                                                 27


Malacca                                                              141

Moors of Africa                                                      232


New Guinea                                                           206

New Holland                                                          207


Palmyra, Queen of                                                     30

Persia                                                                72

Philippine Isles                                                     209


Siam                                                                 139

Siberia                                                              177

Sumatra                                                              195

Syria                                                                 31


Tartary                                                              162

Thibet                                                               130

Timor                                                                204

Troy                                                                  29

Turkomans                                                             34

Turkey                                                                52


Van Diemen’s Land                                                    208




                           HISTORY OF WOMEN.




    [Illustration: Rebecca bringing water for the camels of Isaac.]




                                 ASIA.


The ancient patriarchs led a quiet pastoral life, far removed from
those excitements which kindle the avarice and ambition of men in
modern times. Their chief care was to increase their flocks; and for
this purpose they removed their tents, from time to time, near the most
verdant pastures and abundant fountains. Their habits and manners
partook of the simplicity of their occupations; of this there is
sufficient proof in the story of Jacob’s courtship and marriage.

In those times, when the earth was thinly peopled, an increase of
laborers was an increase of wealth; hence, physical strength, being
the quality most needed, was most esteemed. To be the mother of a
numerous family was the most honorable distinction of women; and the
birth of a son was regarded as a far more fortunate event than the
birth of a daughter. Under such circumstances, women were naturally
considered in the light of property; and whoever wished for a wife must
pay the parents for her, or perform a stipulated period of service, as
Jacob did for Rachel. Sometimes, when parents were desirous to unite
their families, the parties were solemnly betrothed in childhood, and
the price of the bride stipulated. Marriage in those primitive times
consisted merely in a formal bargain between the bridegroom and the
father of the maiden, solemnized by a feast.

We are not told how far the affections of women were consulted in these
arrangements, but there is every reason to suppose that they were
passively guided by others.

Among the Israelites, as well as among the nations with whom they
sojourned, innocence was by no means universal. The world seems very
soon to have grown old in sin. Even in the remotest times, there are
allusions to a class of women openly and shamelessly vicious; and it
is hardly possible for the imagination to conceive of a crime that
is not mentioned in the laws of Moses. The deception practised by
Abraham and his son Isaac, lest the beauty of their wives should be the
occasion of their own death, betrays habits and manners sufficiently
violent and profligate. That the husbands of Sarah and Rebecca should
have been willing thus to consult their own safety, at the risk of
exposing them to insult, is by no means extraordinary among a people
where polygamy prevailed; for in all such countries the value placed
upon women has an origin essentially low and depraved. We are told that
Sarah herself consented to pass for the sister of her husband; and
both in Egypt and in Gerar the handsome stranger was ordered into the
household of the king. That marriage was acknowledged as a protection,
and that the concealment of it left her defenceless, is shown by
Pharaoh’s earnest expostulation with Abraham: “What hast thou done
unto me? Why saidst thou, She is my sister? Why didst thou not tell me
she was thy wife?” The same is likewise implied by the reproof which
Abimelech, king of the Philistines, gave to Abraham, and afterwards to
his son Isaac, under similar circumstances.

The occupations of the ancient Jewish women were laborious. They
spent their time in spinning and weaving cloth for garments, and for
the covering of the tents; in cooking the food, tending the flocks,
grinding the corn, and drawing water from the wells. When Abraham
entertained the three strangers under the tree before his dwelling,
“He hastened into the tent unto Sarah, and said, make ready quickly
three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes upon the hearth.”
Jacob found Rachel tending the flocks of her wealthy father; and when
Abraham’s servant sought the beautiful Rebecca as a wife for Isaac, the
damsel not only drew water for him, but for his camels also.

The performance of these tasks does not necessarily imply a deficiency
of respect for women, for at that period kings and princes were in the
habit of reaping their own grain, and slaying their own cattle. The
condition of women then bore a general correspondence to that of the
men, as it ever since has done.

The manners were generally rude, and females of course were not treated
with the politeness which has prevailed in modern times. Thus when the
daughters of Jethro came to draw water for their flocks, the shepherds
of Midian drove them away, notwithstanding their father was high priest
of the country.

Jewish husbands seem to have had a discretionary power of divorcing
their wives; and no bargain or vow made by a woman was binding, unless
made in the presence of her father or husband, and with their sanction.

Before the time of Moses, women appear to have been incapable of
inheriting the estates of their fathers, even when he died without
other heirs. The daughters of Zelophead brought before Moses, the
priests, the princes, and the congregation a petition, setting forth
that their father had died in the wilderness without sons; on which
account they thought themselves entitled to a share of his possessions.
Moses granted the petition, and ordained that in future, when a man
died without sons, his inheritance should descend to the daughters.

We know little of the amusements of Israelitish women; but in the
early periods of their history, when both sexes were almost constantly
occupied in procuring the means of subsistence, it is not probable that
amusements were either frequent or various. Music and dancing were
unquestionably among the most ancient recreations of human beings.
I imagine they were coeval with language itself; for they were but
varied manifestations of those emotions and thoughts which words were
framed to express. Among modern highly civilized nations, dancing is
indeed regulated by merely artificial rules, and has as little to do
with character as the projection of a map; but in more simple forms of
society, the national dances, like national tunes, are an embodiment of
the characteristic passions of the people: such are the war dances of
the Indians, and the voluptuous dances of the East.

Moses speaks of singing men and singing women; and throughout the Old
Testament there is frequent mention of music and dancing at sacred
festivals. After Pharaoh and his host had perished in the Red sea,
we are told that “Miriam the prophetess took a timbrel in her hand,
and all the women went out after her with timbrels and with dances.
And Miriam answered them, ‘Sing ye to the Lord, for he hath triumphed
gloriously.’”

Deborah and Barak likewise joined in a song of triumph, after the
defeat of Sisera.

Whether music and dancing were entirely confined to public and solemn
occasions, is uncertain; but we can hardly imagine that it was so. The
ancient Israelites, like other people who live in similar climates, no
doubt highly enjoyed family meetings in the open air, each one under
the shadow “of his own vine and fig-tree;” and to have had musical
instruments, without using them on such occasions, would have been a
strange perversity.

In the later periods of Jewish history, a class of public singers
probably existed, whose character was similar to such classes now found
in the East; this may be inferred from the words of the son of Sirach,
“use not much the company of a woman who is a singer.”

In the patriarchal ages the Jewish women must have enjoyed a large
share of personal freedom; for we read of all ranks engaged in the
labors of the field, and going out of the cities to draw water. That
they were not usually secluded from visiters seems to be implied by the
question which the strangers asked Abraham, “Where is Sarah, thy wife?”
Indeed, living as they did in tents, and removing so frequently, it
would have been no easy matter to have preserved the complete privacy
that exists in the seraglios of the East. But as the Jews grew more
numerous and wealthy, the higher ranks indulged in a much greater
number of wives, and kept them more carefully secluded. Solomon had
seven hundred wives, and three hundred mistresses; but these, like
horses and chariots, were probably valued merely as the appendages of
ostentatious grandeur. To prevent the increasing tendency to polygamy,
a law was made forbidding any man who took a new wife to diminish the
food and raiment of his other wives, or in any respect to treat them
with less attention.

The part of the house appropriated to females was called the armon.
It was universally toward the east, and entirely separated from the
apartments of the men. None but the nearest male relations were ever
allowed to pass the threshold. Any infringement of this law was
punished with great severity.

The houses in Palestine were built with flat roofs, and in such a
manner as to inclose in the centre a large, open, quadrangular court,
called the chazer or thavech. This court was as completely sheltered
from public observation as the most private apartment. It contained a
fountain shaded by palm trees, and screened by an awning which could
be drawn over it whenever occasion required; it was ornamented with
columns, vases of flowers, and tesselated marble, according to the
wealth of the owner. Here the women pursued their occupations, played
with their children, and enjoyed the cool evening air, at seasons
when there was no danger of the approach of strangers. The arrival of
male visiters was doubtless proclaimed in season for them to retire,
as it now is in Christian convents and eastern seraglios. When king
David went out against Absalom, his women assembled on the house-top
to witness his departure, as they are now allowed to do in oriental
countries, when they wish to see any procession or show. From various
passages of Scripture there is reason to suppose that people generally
slept on the house-tops in summer, as they still do in many of the fine
climates of the East.

The occupations of women during the prosperous reign of Solomon may be
gathered from his Proverbs: “Who can find a virtuous woman? Her price
is far above rubies. The heart of her husband shall safely trust in
her, and he shall have no need of spoil. She seeketh wool and flax,
she worketh willingly with her hands. She riseth while it is yet
night, and giveth meat to her household, and tasks to her maidens. She
stretcheth forth her hand to the distaff; her fingers hold the spindle.
She openeth her hand to the poor, yea, she stretcheth forth her hands
to the needy. She maketh herself coverings of tapestry; her clothing
is silk and purple. She looketh well to her household, and eateth not
the bread of idleness. Give her of the fruit of her hands; let her own
works praise her in the gates.”

That women sometimes transacted business, and made bargains in their
own name, seems to be implied in the Proverbs: “She considereth a field
and buyeth it; with the fruit of her hands she planteth a vineyard.
She maketh fine linen and selleth it. She delivereth girdles to the
merchant.” It is likewise certain that women went with their husbands
to Jerusalem, and worshipped in the temple on solemn festivals.

Even in those days there was no dearth of invective against the follies
and vices of the sex. Solomon praises good women in the most exalted
terms; but he implies their extreme rarity by the question, “Who can
_find_ a virtuous woman?” The son of Sirach says, “All wickedness is
but little to the wickedness of a woman.” “From garments cometh a moth,
and from women wickedness.” “A loud crying woman and a scold shall be
sought out to drive away the enemies.” “A drunken woman and a gadder
abroad causeth great anger.”

Perhaps it never occurred to those wise men, that the system of
polygamy was calculated to stifle the best emotions of the female
heart, and to call all its worst passions into exercise. But even
under the most barbarous and tyrannical forms of society, the salutary
influence of good and sensible women is felt and acknowledged. The son
of Sirach says, “Blessed is the man that has a virtuous wife, for the
number of his days shall be doubled;” and the Old Testament abounds
with similar remarks.

The spirit of that age was not favorable to intellectual improvement;
but as there were wise men, who formed exceptions to the general
ignorance, and were destined to guide the world into more advanced
states, so there was a corresponding proportion of wise women; and
among the Jews, as well as other nations, we find a strong tendency to
believe that women were in more immediate connection with Heaven, than
men. Miriam, the sister of Aaron, was a prophetess, and seems to have
possessed great influence. Deborah, the wife of Lapidoth, was not only
a prophetess, but for many years a judge in Israel; and we are told
that Barak refused to go up with his army against Sisera, unless she
went up with him. At a later period, there was Anna the prophetess, who
for many years remained in the temple of the Lord, night and day, in
fasting and prayer. When Joseph and Mary brought the child Jesus into
the temple, she immediately “gave thanks to the Lord, and spake of him
to all them who looked for redemption in Israel.” The belief in women
who were under the influence of evil spirits, is shown by the story of
the witch of Endor.

That women were imbued with the sternness which marked the barbarous
character of men, is evident in the story of Jael, who drove the nail
through the temples of Sisera, her sleeping guest; and of Judith, who
deliberately bewitched the senses of Holofernes, that she might gain an
opportunity to sever his head from his shoulders.

Josephus tells us that Mary, the daughter of Eleazer, who dwelt beyond
Jordan, of eminent wealth and rank, fled away to Jerusalem during the
Roman invasion, and was there when the city was besieged by Cæsar’s
troops. The little property she had been able to bring safely out
of Perea was seized by the rapacious guards, from whom she received
continual insult and injury. At last famine prevailed to a dreadful
degree in Jerusalem, and it became impossible for her to obtain any
food. Goaded to madness by long continued hunger, she killed her own
infant for food, saying, “Why should I preserve thee, miserable babe!
If the Romans spare our lives, we must be slaves; and the seditious
villains among us are more terrible than either of these things. Be
thou my food and a by-word to the world, which is all that is now
wanting to complete the calamities of the Jews.” The soldiers perceived
that food had been cooked in her house, and demanded their share of it.
She produced the remnant of her horrid meal, saying, in mockery, “This
is mine own son; and what has been done is mine own doing. Eat of this
food; I have eaten of it myself. Do not pretend to be more tender than
a woman, or more compassionate than a mother.”

The seditious soldiers, accustomed as they were to bloodshed and crime,
went out trembling and afraid. When the famishing people heard of it,
they desired to die, and esteemed those most happy who had died before
such miseries were witnessed.

The dress of the ancient Hebrew women probably differed but little
from that worn by the daughters of Israel at the present day. A robe
which fell in ample folds, fastened by a girdle; loose flowing sleeves
confined by bracelets; braided hair; and a turban, from which descended
a long, transparent veil. Garments of silk and fine linen, of scarlet
and purple, are often mentioned in connection with people of rank; and
we are told that Tamar wore a robe of divers colors, according to the
custom of the king’s unmarried daughters. Jewels were in use, even in
the days of the patriarchs; for when Isaac sent his servant in search
of Rebecca, he sent bracelets and ear-rings, of silver and of gold; and
when Moses built a tabernacle for the Lord, “Both men and women came,
as many as were willing-hearted, and brought bracelets, and ear-rings,
and rings, and tablets, all jewels of gold, an offering unto the Lord.
And all the women that were wise-hearted did spin with their hands and
brought that which they had spun, both of blue, and of purple, and
of scarlet, and of fine linen.” The Israelitish mirrors were made of
polished brass, and the women were so partial to them that they carried
them everywhere, even to the most solemn places of worship. The use of
false hair among the ancient Jews seems to be implied by the fact that
Absalom’s hair sold for two hundred shekels.

The Jews endeavored, both by law and custom, to keep their nation
unmixed by foreign intermarriages; and it was a favorite plan with
them to unite different branches of the same family. Thus the wife of
Abraham was his sister, by the father’s side; and Isaac and Jacob both
sought wives among their kinsmen. When a man died without heirs, the
nearest relation was bound to marry the widow; and if he refused to do
so, she publicly accused him before the elders, loosed the shoe from
his foot, spat in his face, and said, “So shall it be done unto the man
that will not build up his brother’s house.” And his name was called
in Israel, “The house of him that hath his shoe loosed.”

Notwithstanding the effort to keep the blood of the nation, and even
of individual families, unmixed from generation to generation, the
rule was sometimes broken through. Thus Moses married an Ethiopian
woman; the wife of Joseph was daughter of the priest of On; and Solomon
married the daughter of Pharaoh, king of Egypt.

It is generally supposed that formal ceremonies at a wedding were first
prescribed by Moses. According to the rabbies, the appointed days were
Friday for a bride who had never been married, and Thursday for a
widow. The contract was read and signed by ten witnesses, who were free
and of age. The bride was veiled and given to the bridegroom by her
parents. Her father said, “Take her according to the law of Moses;” and
the husband answered, “I take her according to that law.” Benedictions
were then pronounced both by the parents and the guests. The maidens
sang a marriage song, and the men danced around the bridegroom, while
the women danced around the bride. The feasting continued seven days,
unless the bride were a widow, in which case they continued but three
days. If a man married a number of wives in quick succession, he was
bound to allow a feast of seven days to each. At a later period the
form was somewhat changed. In the presence of ten witnesses, the
bridegroom said to the bride, “Be thou a wife to me according to the
law of Moses, and I will worship and honor thee, according to the word
of God, and will feed and govern thee, according to the custom of those
who worship, honor, and govern their wives faithfully. I give thee
fifty shekels for thy dowry.”

The story of Samson and Delilah seems to imply that custom did not
allow a young man to seek a girl in marriage without the intervention
of his parents. He said to his father and mother, “I have seen a woman
of the daughters of the Philistines; now therefore get her for me to
wife;” and when his parents started objections, he still pleaded, “Get
her for me; for she pleaseth me well.” The idea of applying to the
beautiful Delilah in person does not seem to have occurred to his mind.

During the magnificent prosperity of Israel, marriage ceremonies
were conducted with more pomp than they had been in the days of the
patriarchs. Instead of the bridegroom’s paying a certain sum of money,
or performing a certain period of service for his bride, it became
customary for wealthy parents to give a handsome dowry with their
daughters. This is the natural tendency of society; because with the
progress of wealth and refinement women become expensive, rather than
profitable, in a pecuniary point of view.

On the day of the nuptials, the bride was conducted by her female
relations to the bath, where she was anointed with the choicest
perfumes, her hair perfumed and braided, her eyebrows deepened with
black powder, and the tips of her fingers tinged with rose-color. Her
companions then arrayed her in a marriage robe of brilliant color,
which fell in ample folds to her feet. The girdle and bracelets
were more or less costly, according to the wealth of her parents. A
flame-colored veil was surmounted by a crown, usually of gold; for this
reason, a bride among the Hebrews was called _the crowned_. Before she
left the bath, her friends from all quarters sent in their wedding
gifts. The bridegroom was anointed and crowned in a similar manner, by
the young men of his family.

The bride, accompanied by her nurse, was conveyed in a litter from
her father’s house, followed by all her female friends and relations
closely veiled. The procession was headed by seventy young priests
bearing flambeaux of oil and pitch, and by a multitude of persons
carrying the clothes, jewels, and furniture, which had been presented
to the bride; each person carried but one thing. Next came the
bridegroom and his friends, in their richest apparel. Then came the
bride in her palanquin: and servants and children closed the train.

When they arrived at the bridegroom’s house, the bride anointed the
door-posts with oil, and adorned them with woollen fillets. Then the
maidens lifted her over the threshold, which formed the boundary
between her single and married life. The nuptial train entered the
courts, and the bride solemnly took possession of her apartments in
the armon, where a feast was prepared for her and her female friends.
When all had partaken plentifully, both men and women assembled in
the inner court. The maidens led the bride, and the young men the
bridegroom, to the parents, who placed the right hand of the wife
within the right hand of her husband, and pronounced upon them the
paternal blessing. “Blessed be thou, O Lord our God, who didst create
Adam and Eve! Blessed be thou, O Lord our God, who causeth Zion to
rejoice in her children! Blessed be thou, O Lord our God, who makest
the bride and the bridegroom to be glad together! The God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, be with you, and help you
together, and give his blessing richly upon you! Jehovah make the wife
that comes into thy house like Rachel, and like Leah, who built up the
house of Israel!”

The marriage festivities continued seven days, during which time
numerous gifts were exchanged between the newly married and their
guests.

When a man believed he had reason to be jealous of his wife, he could
at any time compel her to submit to the public ordeal of drinking the
water of jealousy. On such occasions, the wife was brought before
the priests and elders, in the midst of a crowd of men, women, and
children, who collected from curiosity. When the culprit stood in the
presence of her judges, she was left alone, and if neither persuasion
or sternness could extort from her a confession of guilt, they decreed
that she should drink the water of jealousy, and take the oath of
purgation. Being then led forth from the sanctuary, the priest, who was
appointed for the purpose, threw her jewels, veil, and turban on the
ground, dishevelled her braided hair, rent her garments from the top of
the neck to the breast, and bound a strip of bark about her, in place
of a girdle, saying, “Thou hast forsaken the manner of the daughters
of Israel, who cover their heads, and hast followed the manners of the
heathen, who go with their heads uncovered.”

Then the men spat on the ground, and the women uttered cries of
abhorrence. The husband gave the priest the “offering of jealousy, the
tenth part of an ephah of barley-meal, with no oil or frankincense
poured thereon.” Then the priest filled an earthen vessel with holy
water from the laver beside the altar, and put into it dust from the
floor of the tabernacle. With an elevated and solemn voice he said, “If
thou art innocent, be thou free from the curse of this bitter water;
but if thou art guilty, may Jehovah make thee a curse among thy people,
and bring on thee all the curses written in his law.”

If the woman answered, expressing her willingness to submit to the
ordeal, the priest waved the “offering of jealousy” before Jehovah, and
mixing the meal with salt, he burned it in the fire. Then the curses of
the law were written on a roll, and washed off in the vessel of water
wherein dust had been mingled. The woman drank the water of cursing,
with her eyes lifted toward the holy of holies.

If, after a long pause, she was perceived to be unharmed, a shout of
joy burst from the multitude, and hallelujah resounded from the temple
through the streets of the city. Her parents and husband congratulated
her on this proof of innocence, her hair was braided anew, her jewels
and veil restored, and she was conducted home in triumph.

There was such a firm belief that any guilty person who drank the
“water of cursing” would be immediately swollen with painful and
loathsome disease, that few would have ventured to abide by the ordeal,
unless they were conscious of innocence; and if any one had been
sufficiently daring to run the supposed risk, the priests would not
have been easily deceived by a bold woman, who tried to imitate the
quiet fearlessness of virtue.

By the Mosaic law, an unfaithful wife was stoned to death, and the
partner of her guilt shared the same fate.

Among the customs of Jewish women, it is mentioned that “the daughters
of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite,
four days in the year.” It is well known, from Scripture history, that
Jephthah’s daughter went out with timbrels and dances to meet her
father, when he returned victorious over his enemies; and that she
cheerfully consented to be sacrificed, in order to fulfil a vow he had
made unto the Lord.

It is not recorded what ceremonies were observed in commemoration of
her death; but it was probably done after the manner in which they
were accustomed to bewail women who died unmarried. The procession
were clothed in mourning garments, with dishevelled hair, and ashes
upon their heads, and as they moved, they wrung their hands and
uttered loud lamentations. It was not allowable to bathe, or anoint,
during the days appointed for mourning. Jewish widows mourned for
their husbands at least for the space of ten months, and it was deemed
extremely indecorous for them to marry again in that time.

Children mourn a year for their parents. They do not put on black,
but wear the same clothes they had on at the death of their father,
however tattered and dirty they may be. Mourning for children, uncles,
and aunts, lasts one month, during which period they do not cut their
nails. When a husband returns from the funeral of his wife, he washes
his hands, uncovers his feet, seats himself on the ground, and remains
in the same posture, groaning and weeping, until the seventh day.

The custom of hired mourners to weep at funerals, and excite others to
tears, was common with the Jews, and other ancient nations. Jeremiah
says, “Call for the mourning women, that they may come; and send for
cunning women that they may come; and let them make haste, and take
up a wailing for us, that our eyes may run down with tears, and our
eyelids gush out with water.”

Women while in captivity wore their hair shaven, and nails cut close,
in token of grief. A new-born Hebrew infant was washed and rubbed with
salt. When it was forty days old, the father offered a lamb of the
first year and a turtle-dove, the first as a burnt-offering and the
latter as a sin-offering for the mother. She prayed while the victims
were slain by the priest, who afterwards sprinkled her with the blood.
At the feast of Pentecost an infant child was solemnly presented by its
parents before Jehovah, in the temple.

There was a Jewish sect called Essenes, who were similar to the
Pythagoreans, and in many points resembled the Shakers of modern times.
Their name was derived from a Persian word signifying resemblance to
a hive of bees. There was an entire community of goods among them,
and very strict subordination to their elders. The tendency of their
doctrines was to keep the body in complete subjection to the soul,
which they believed to be immortal. They lived in seclusion, never
mixed with the world, drank only water, ate only bread and hyssop, and
had great contempt for women. They always wore white garments, and
spat behind them, in token of abhorrence to the world they had left.
Marriage was entirely forbidden among the higher class of this sect,
and among the inferior classes it was allowed only with very strict
limitations and severe restraints. This society was kept up by people
who, from various motives, left the world to join them, or saw fit to
intrust them with the education of their children.

None of the priests of Israel were allowed to marry a widow, or a
divorced woman, or one whose character was not irreproachable.

The Jews are now scattered all over the earth; but they everywhere
adhere to their ancient faith and usages; even in the United States,
where every thing is in the most direct opposition to the old Hebrew
spirit of regulating, defining, bounding, and limiting.

This singular people are very numerous in Poland, where they have
erected stately synagogues and academies. The city of Hamburgh has been
called the “lesser Jerusalem,” on account of the number of Jews who
reside there. They are numerous in Turkey, and have colonies in India.

A German traveller gives the following enthusiastic description of
the Jewesses in Poland: “I may here say a few words about the fair
daughters of Israel, whom I saw at Kalish, decked in ornaments and
rich apparel, in honor of the Sabbath. The pearl bands, worn as head
ornaments by the Polish Jewesses, are so peculiar, that it is almost
impossible to convey a correct idea of them by mere description.
These bands are seen only in Poland, and their form obviously denotes
their ancient and oriental origin. They consist of strings of pearls
intermingled with gold, forming altogether an elaborate piece of
architecture, whose construction it is not easy to describe.

“A Jewess of the higher class, adorned with her pearl hair-band
and gold neck-chain, from which is frequently suspended an ancient
gold coin, is an object of no common interest, especially if she be
as beautiful as I have often seen Jewesses in Poland. The events
of thousands of years seem to be recorded in their soul-beaming
countenances. They deserve to be stored in the memory, as a portion
of the pure, beautiful, and sublime of this world. Dignity, feeling,
tender melancholy, and, not unfrequently, deep-seated sorrow, is
expressed in the features of the fair daughters of Israel, whose
notions of virtue and decorum are as rigid as the laws of their
forefathers. This rule, like every other, has of course its exceptions.
Few will deny that beauty consists more in expression than in the form
of the features. Many women who are pronounced beautiful produce but
little, or perhaps even an unfavorable impression, merely from the
want of intellectual spirit. But the utmost beauty of form combined
with expression leaves nothing to be wished for; and this will be
acknowledged by all who have seen the Jewesses of Poland.”

“A faithful adherence to their national costume serves to heighten
their natural attractions.”

The modern Jewish women light a lamp every Friday evening, half an hour
before sunset, which is the beginning of their Sabbath. The custom
is said to be in remembrance of their original mother, who first
extinguished the lamp of righteousness, and to remind them of their
obligation to rekindle it. Instead of the scape-goat, they now use
white fowls. At the appointed season every mother of a family takes
a white hen, and striking it on the head, says, “Let this die for my
sins; she shall die, but I shall live.”

Women did not succeed to the Jewish crown; two instances, however,
occur in their history, where the supreme power was in female hands.
Athaliah, the daughter of king Omri, and mother of Ahaziah, nearly
destroyed the royal family, and usurped the throne for six years. At a
later period, Alexander Jannœus left the crown to his wife Alexandra
during her life, and then to either of his sons whom she might think
proper to appoint.

The ancient Jews were of the same dark complexion as the Arabs and
Chinese; but their history furnishes a remarkable exemplification of
the influence of climate. They are dispersed all over the globe, and
wheresoever they sojourn, those who marry among Gentile nations are
cast out of the synagogue; therefore whatever changes have taken place
in their color must have been induced by climate and modes of life.
There are now Jews of all complexions, from the light blonde of the
Saxon to the deep brown of the Spaniard, and the mahogany hue of the
Moors. The black Jews of Hindostan were originally slaves purchased
by the Jews who sought shelter in that country, and who, with more
consistency than Christians have manifested, emancipated their bondmen
when they became converts to their religion.

       *       *       *       *       *

Little is known of ancient Assyria, and of Babylonia, which was at
first a part of Assyria. Being a wealthy and luxurious nation, their
women were of course treated with a degree of consideration unknown
among savage tribes. The manner in which Babylonish women are spoken
of in the Bible implies great magnificence of apparel; and as there is
always a correspondence between the moral and intellectual condition
of the sexes, it is not probable that women were universally and
totally ignorant in a country where the sciences made such advancement,
and written laws were used.

The Babylonians manufactured rich embroidery, tapestry, fine linen,
and magnificent carpets. They were distinguished for elegance and
refinement of manners; were very fond of music, and had a great variety
of instruments. Singing and dancing girls were selected from the most
beautiful to entertain the wealthy at their meals; but we have no means
of knowing whether ladies of high rank considered it a degradation
to dance and sing before strangers. It is generally supposed that
the Babylonian women were admitted to social and convivial meetings
with men; and it is on record that they sometimes drank too freely of
the wine. Weaving and embroidery were no doubt generally practised
by women, either for amusement or profit. With regard to marriages,
they had a yearly custom of a peculiar kind. In every district three
men, respectable for their virtue, were chosen to conduct all the
marriageable girls to the public assembly. Here they were put up at
auction by the public crier, while the magistrates presided over the
sales. The most beautiful were sold first, and the rich contended
eagerly for a choice. The most ugly or deformed girl was sold next in
succession to the handsomest, and assigned to any person who would take
her with the least sum of money. The price given for the beautiful was
divided into dowries for the homely. Poor people, who cared less for
personal endowments, were well content to receive a plain wife for the
sake of a moderate portion. No man was allowed to provide a husband for
his daughter; and no man was permitted to take away the woman he had
purchased, until he had given security to make her his wife. The feasts
by which wealthy Babylonians commemorated their marriages became at
last so extravagant that laws were made to restrain them. The Assyrians
worshipped Venus under the name of Mylitta. Some of the ceremonies
observed in her temple are unsuitable to be described in these pages.

When the Babylonians were besieged by the Persians, they strangled all
the women except their mothers, and one other in each family, to bake
their bread. This was done to prevent famine; and the lot fell upon
women probably because they were of less importance in carrying on the
war.

It is not known whether females were admitted into the priesthood; but
a woman always slept in the temple of Jupiter Belus, whom the Chaldean
priests declared to have been chosen by the deity as his especial
favorite from among all the nation.

Two remarkable women are mentioned in the brief records we have of
Assyria and Babylon. Their names are Semiramis and Nitocris.

When Ninus, king of Assyria, besieged Bactria, it is said the attempt
would not have been successful, had it not been for the assistance
of Semiramis, who was at that time the wife of one of his principal
officers. She planned so skilful a method of attack, that victory was
insured. Ninus became a passionate lover of the sagacious lady, and her
husband committed suicide. Soon after this she became queen. Some say
she requested the monarch to invest her with uncontrolled power merely
for the space of five days; and as soon as a decree to this effect had
been made public, she caused him to be put to death; but other authors
deny this. She succeeded Ninus in the government of the Assyrian
empire, and to render her name immortal, she built the great city of
Babylon in one year. Two millions of men were constantly employed upon
it. Certain dykes built by order of the queen, to defend the city from
inundations, are spoken of as admirable.

Altars were built and divine honors paid to the memory of Semiramis.

The other celebrated queen was Nitocris, wife of Nabonadius, who in the
Scripture is called Evil Merodach. She was a woman of great endowments.
While her voluptuous husband gave himself up to what the world calls
pleasure, she managed the affairs of state with extraordinary judgment
and sagacity. She was particularly famous for the canals and bridges
which she caused to be made for the improvement of Babylon.

Such instances as these do not indicate a degraded condition of women.
Yet the Assyrian monarchs had seraglios, at least in times later than
Nitocris; for we are told that the effeminate Sardanapalus spent his
chief time in the apartments of his women, learning to handle the
distaff, and imitating their voice and manners. This fact proves that
spinning was not unusual with women of high rank. The exceeding love of
perfumes which prevails in the East characterized Assyria. When Babylon
was conquered, all the evils arose which might have been expected among
a voluptuous people so long accustomed to luxurious living. Fathers
and husbands, rather than relinquish their own expensive habits, were
not unfrequently willing to receive the shameful price of a wife or
daughter’s beauty.

       *       *       *       *       *

The ancient Lycians, supposed to be descendants of the Cretans, always
took their names from their mothers, and not from their fathers. When
any one was asked to give an account of his ancestors, he mentioned the
female branches only. If a free woman married a slave, the children
were free; but if a citizen married a concubine or a foreigner, his
children could not attain to any political dignity. The inheritance
descended to daughters, and sons were excluded. Some say the Lycian
women were treated with this remarkable degree of respect, because
their prayers to Neptune once removed an extraordinary salt blighting
dew from the fields. Others suppose it was because their ancestors,
the Cretans, descended from the goddess Thetis. A woman presided over
the different companies into which the Cretans were divided, had the
entire management of the household, and at table gave the choicest food
to those who had most distinguished themselves. The origin of these
peculiar customs is obscured by fable, but they probably arose from
some great benefit early conferred upon the state by women. The Lycian
men mourned for the dead by assuming female garments.

Artemisia, queen of Caria, so famous for her wisdom and bravery, was
descended from the Cretans on the mother’s side. By the death of
her husband she was left with the government of the kingdom, until
her son should be of age. She served with Xerxes in his expedition
against Greece, and furnished five of the best ships in the fleet.
She endeavored to dissuade the Persian monarch from venturing a naval
battle at Salamis; but her judicious advice not being accepted,
she commanded her portion of the fleet, and fought with the utmost
bravery. When her vessel was pointed out to Xerxes, he exclaimed, “The
men on this occasion behave like women, and the women like men.” The
Athenian conquerors considered themselves so much disgraced by having
a female antagonist, that they pursued her with the utmost vengeance,
and offered ten thousand drachmæ to whoever would take her alive. But
she escaped in safety to her own kingdom by means of an artifice; for
having attacked one of her own allies, with whom she was displeased,
the Greeks supposed her vessel to be one friendly to their cause. Some
other stratagems, which she used to obtain power over her enemies, were
entirely unworthy of a generous mind.

Xerxes entertained so high an opinion of Artemisia, that he confided to
her care the education of the young princes of Persia. Her statue was
erected at Lacedæmon, among those of the Persian generals.

She became in love with a young man of Abydos, who did not return
her passion; in consequence of which she caused his eyes to be put
out while he slept, and then, in a fit of remorse, jumped from the
promontory of Leucas into the sea.

There was another Artemisia, daughter of a Carian king, who married
Mausolus, famous for his beauty. She was so much in love with her
husband, that after his death she mixed his ashes with her drink. She
erected a monument to his memory, so magnificent, that it was called
one of the seven wonders of the world; and from this circumstance the
word mausoleum is derived. She offered large rewards to the literary
men of the age, for the best elegiac panegyric on her husband. Two
years after his decease, she died of grief.

       *       *       *       *       *

Little is known of the Trojan women. Their condition was probably
very similar to that of women in other nations of the same period.
Andromache, though a princess, and well beloved by her husband, fed
and took care of the horses of Hector. It is to be presumed that she
had a good deal of skill in embroidery, for we are told that she made
a representation of the death of Hector, surrounded by garlands. The
dreams and prophecies of Cassandra, daughter of king Priam, betray the
usual tendencies to invest women with supernatural powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Asiatic Greeks, particularly those of Ionia, were distinguished for
voluptuous refinement, and the beauty and gracefulness of their women.
The celebrated Aspasia, first the mistress, and afterwards the wife of
Pericles, was of Ionia. Her wit and eloquence must have equalled her
beauty; for we are told that Plato loved to discourse philosophy with
her, and that Pericles sought her advice in great political emergencies.

Zenobia, queen of Palmyra and the East, is the most remarkable among
Asiatic women. Her genius struggled with, and overcame, all the
obstacles presented by oriental laws and customs. She is said to have
been as beautiful as Cleopatra, from whom she claimed descent. She
knew the Latin, Greek, Syriac, and Egyptian languages; had drawn up,
for her own use, an abridgment of oriental history; and read Homer and
Plato under the tuition of Longinus. She was the companion and friend
of her husband, and accompanied him on his hunting excursions with
eagerness and courage equal to his own. She despised the effeminacy
of a covered carriage, and often appeared on horseback in military
costume. Sometimes she marched several miles on foot, at the head of
the troops. Having revenged the murder of her husband, she ascended the
throne, and for five years governed Palmyra, Syria, and the East, with
wonderful steadiness and wisdom. After a long and desperate resistance
she was conquered by the Roman emperor Aurelian, who had grown jealous
of the increasing wealth and power of his rival.

The conduct of Zenobia after her capture tarnishes all the lustre
of her character. She who had conducted many battles by her wisdom,
and gained them by her valor, trembled when she heard the ferocious
Roman soldiery demand her death; and she sought to save herself by
sacrificing her best friends to the resentment of the conqueror.

Zenobia, almost weighed down with jewels, and chained with gold,
walked, a splendid captive, in the triumph of Aurelian. That emperor,
however, treated his unfortunate rival with a degree of clemency
unusual in ancient times. He gave Zenobia a very elegant villa,
about twenty miles from Rome. The great Queen of the East sunk into
the obscurity of private life, and her daughters married into noble
families.

       *       *       *       *       *

Many of the customs of the ancient Jews still prevail in Syria. The
rude mill by which they grind their corn is turned by two women, as it
was in the days of our Saviour. The excellent wells in the neighborhood
of mount Lebanon are still the resort of women, who carry thence large
jars of water on their heads, as the daughters of the patriarchs did of
old. They are very timid; and if a stranger approaches the fountains
they immediately draw their veils. In common with many other Asiatic
nations, they bake their bread in small cakes against a heated brick
wall. When the cake is sufficiently done, it drops of itself. This no
doubt was the manner in which Sarah “baked cakes on the hearth” when
Abraham entertained the strangers in his tent.

When a Syrian lady is betrothed, her lover sends her a ring and other
jewels, according to his rank and wealth. After these are accepted, she
is not allowed to see her intended husband, or any gentleman but her
nearest relatives, until the wedding ceremonies are completed. There is
no period fixed for the bridegroom to send for the bride; but during
the fourteen previous days he repeatedly sends presents to her; and
five days before she is summoned from her father’s house, he sends a
confidential woman with jewels for her head, neck, and arms. Under the
care of this woman, the bride is bathed, her hands stained red, and
her face painted like a doll. Presents from friends are sent to the
bath, and the bride walks several times round the fountain, adorned
with a succession of new dresses and ornaments, accompanied by lighted
candles, and the joyful cries of her attendants. After this, she is
required to sit in a corner with closed eyes the whole day, except at
the hours of eating. The relatives of the bridegroom escort her to his
house, mounted on a horse, with her eyes still closed, accompanied by
musicians, women bearing torches, and mules loaded with the dresses,
ornaments, or household utensils, which she has received. As the
procession passes along, the people invoke blessings on the bride.

The Syrian women ride astride on horseback, veiled; but they are less
scrupulous than most Asiatic women about removing their veils, when
comfort or convenience requires it.

Miss Abbot, the British consul’s daughter, who made a journey into
the mountains of Syria, speaks of the inhabitants as remarkable for
their kindness and simplicity. They had never before seen a European
lady, and their curiosity was much excited. The men stopped her horse
to present bouquets and benedictions; and the women crowded her
apartments, bringing baskets full of delicious grapes and figs. The
young lady says: “As I passed, blessings were invoked upon me, as
upon an Arab bride. I was everywhere received with the affectionate
welcome of an old friend, rather than with the courteous greeting of
a stranger. The women were extremely neat in their appearance, and
though evidently very poor, would accept of no remuneration for their
offerings.”

The Syrian women wear a very high odd head-dress, called the
_tantoura_, not unlike the horn of a unicorn. It is made of wood,
pasteboard, and tinsel, or of the precious metals set with gems. The
inhabitants of the mountains are less tawny than those who live in the
plains. About Lebanon their complexion resembles that of the French.
The women of Damascus and Tripoli are celebrated for their fairness,
and for their beautiful dark eyes, which are usually visible, though a
veil covers the rest of the face.

Among many sacred relics which abound in Syria, they profess to show
the kitchen and fireplace of the virgin Mary, and the fountain where
she was accustomed to draw water.

In the mountains of the Anti-Libanus are a peculiar class of people
called Druses. They have scarcely any religion, observe neither
fasts nor festivals of any kind, and allow brothers and sisters to
intermarry. They live in a very secluded manner, and rarely take
several wives. The women are extremely modest and industrious. They
grind corn and make bread after the old scripture fashion.

The Druses divorce their wives on the slightest pretext. If a wife ask
her husband’s permission to go out, and he says, “Go,” without adding,
“but come back again,” she is divorced. Though both should wish it,
they cannot live together again, without being re-married according
to Turkish forms. These people are very jealous, but rarely punish a
criminal wife with death; divorce is the usual penalty.

The Turks in Syria, as well as in other parts of their empire, kill a
woman as soon as they suspect her; and the fine incurred by a seducer
is enormously heavy.

The Turkomans are a wandering tribe, living in tents like Bedouins.
They are peculiar for giving a dowry with their daughters, instead of
receiving a price for them. They are exceedingly scrupulous about the
honor of their women. If a brother should see his sister receiving a
kiss even from her betrothed lover, he would shoot the poor girl on the
spot; yet, with the usual inconsistency of mankind, they are themselves
extremely fond of intrigues, and pride themselves not a little on
success.

The Turkoman women are very industrious and ingenious. They make the
tent-coverings of goat hair, and weave carpets scarcely inferior to
those of Persia. They use no shuttle, but pass the thread with their
fingers. They have peculiar skill in dying various brilliant colors.
Nearly all the labor falls upon them. The men do nothing but feed the
horses and camels at sunset.

Syria is a part of the Turkish empire, and of course governed by
Mohammedan rulers.

Dr. Clarke gives the following account of a pacha whom he visited at
Acre. “The harem of the seraglio is accessible only to himself. Early
every evening he regularly retired to this place, through three massive
doors, every one of which he closed and barred with his own hand. Even
to have knocked at the outer gate after he had retired would have been
punished with death. No person in Acre knew the number of his women,
but from the circumstance of a certain number of covers being daily
placed in a kind of wheel or turning cylinder, so contrived as to
convey dishes to the interior, without any possibility of observing the
person who took them. He had from time to time received presents of
female slaves; but after they entered his harem, none but himself knew
whether they were alive or dead. If any of them were ill, he brought
a physician to a hole in the wall, through which the sick person was
allowed to thrust her arm, the pacha himself holding the hand of the
physician while the pulse was examined. He put seven of his wives to
death with his own hand, after his return from a pilgrimage to Mecca,
during which the janizaries had obtained admittance to the harem. From
all the information we could obtain, he treated the tenants of his
harem like the children of his family. When he retired, he carried with
him a number of watch-papers he had amused himself by cutting with
scissors during the day, as toys to distribute among them.”

The same traveller says: “In the evening we took some coffee in the
house of the imperial consul, and were introduced to the ladies of his
family. We were amused by seeing his wife, a very beautiful woman,
sitting cross-legged by us on the divan, and smoking tobacco with
a pipe six feet long. Her eyelashes, as well as those of the other
women, were tinged with the black powder made of sulphuret of antimony.
Although this has by no means a cleanly appearance, it is considered
as essential to the decoration of a woman of rank in Syria as her
ear-rings, or the golden cinctures of her ankles. Dark streaks were
likewise pencilled from the corners of her eyes along the temples. This
reminded us of certain passages of Scripture wherein mention is made
of ‘_putting the eyes in painting_.’ English translators, unable to
reconcile this with their ideas of a lady’s toilet, have rendered it
‘_painting the face_.’”

       *       *       *       *       *

The Arabs, though Mohammedans, seldom have more than one wife. Divorces
rarely take place, unless for misconduct, or for not being the mother
of children. If the Arabian women are fortunate enough to have several
sons, they are almost idolized by their husbands. The little girls are
fair, but they are almost universally exposed to hardships, which soon
spoil the complexion. When young they are very lively and agreeable,
and sing almost perpetually. In cities the marriage ceremonies are
similar to the Turkish. The processions are gay according to the wealth
of the parties, and blessings are invoked on the bride as she passes.

The Bedouins live in tents, divided into three apartments, one for the
men, one for the women, and one for the cattle. Though often ragged and
half clothed, the Bedouin women generally manage to have jewels of some
kind or other, for the neck, ears, nose, and arms. Those who cannot
afford gold or silver, wear a nose ring of iron, sometimes two or
three inches in diameter. The wives of sheiks, and other men of rank,
generally wear rows of sequins across their foreheads, and fastened
in bunches to the ends of their long braided hair. Rings in the nose,
and very large clumsy glass bracelets about the wrist, are common.
Their manner of churning butter is curious. They put the milk into a
goat-skin with the hair all on. This is suspended by strong cords to
the branch of a tree, and a woman shakes it with all her might, until
butter is produced. These skins are seldom washed, and the butter, of
course, is none of the sweetest.

The Bedouins consider their wives as slaves, and exercise arbitrary
power in punishing them for any fault. One of them is said to have
beat his wife to death merely because she had lent his knife without
permission, though she begged pardon and offered in the humblest manner
to go and bring it for him. Being called before a council of the chief
men of the tribe, he acknowledged the offence; saying he had told the
deceased never to meddle with any thing of his, and he was determined
to have a wife who would obey him better. The chief reproved him for
not first making a complaint to him; adding that if his wife should,
after such a step, be guilty of disobedience, he had a right to kill
her if he pleased. The murderer was ordered to pay four sheep, as a
penalty for not making application to the sheik or chief; and soon
after he married another woman.

They are married by a priest, who joins their hands, and reads certain
verses from the Koran. The bride is blindfolded by the priest, and
the bridegroom leads her into his tent, on the top of which a white
flag is displayed; he seats her on a mat, saying, “You are at home.”
He then returns to the assembled company and joins with them in
feasting, singing, shouting, firing guns, and performing rival feats
on horseback, until after midnight. The bride remains blindfolded
during an entire week, her husband merely removing the bandage from
her eyes for a moment, the first time he enters the tent, that she may
be assured of his identity. Some female friend cooks the food, and
performs other domestic duties for her, until she is allowed to see the
light of day. The Arabs have many superstitious observances respecting
marriage. On such occasions they apply to old women skilful in sorcery,
who are supposed to have the art of tying and untying the knots of
fate. In cities, the Arabian women cover their faces with a cloth,
with two holes worked for the eyes, which are almost always bright and
beautiful. Their complexion is lemon-colored. They stain their fingers
and toes a yellowish red, and blacken the joints of the latter. The
eyebrows are stained black, and the lips blue; and a small flower or
spot is often painted or stained on each cheek, the forehead, and the
chin.

The following is a picture of an Arab beauty:--“Her eyes are black,
large, and soft, like the antelope; her look is melancholy and
impassioned; her eyebrows are curved like two arches of ebony; her
figure is straight and supple as a lance; her step is like a young
colt; her eyelids are blackened with kahol, her lips painted blue, her
nails stained a gold color with henneh, and her words are sweet as
honey.”

The Arab women are said to be generally graceful in their motions, and
in the adjustment of their drapery. On entering an apartment, they
carelessly fling off their slippers, and show a naked foot peeping from
beneath the loose ample drawers, which fall below the ankle. Mr. Madox,
who visited the grand sheik, says: “His daughters sat on a sofa with
him; not after the Turkish fashion, but with feet to the ground. They
were rather pretty, gaily dressed, with coins suspended on gold chains
by the sides of their faces. One of them, seeing I had some difficulty
in detaching a piece of meat from the bone, offered me another piece
with her stained and jewelled fingers. After dinner, when they washed
their hands, they made a great lather with the soap offered by the
attendants, which they put in their mouths, and cleansed their teeth
with their fingers. After this they smoked.”

When the wives of Arab chiefs accompany their husbands in devout
pilgrimages to Mecca, they are carried in a litter borne by two
camels. Fifteen miles from Mecca is a small hill, much resorted to
by the devout, called Djebel Arafat, or the Mountain of Gratitude.
On this spot, according to Mohammedan belief, Adam and Eve met, were
reconciled, built a house, and lived together, after a separation
of forty, or, as some say, five hundred, years. The women of Mecca
are said to be free in their manners, even to boldness. This may be
partly owing to the constant sight of strangers, who visit the city
as pilgrims, and partly to the dullness and indifference of the men,
induced by their abject poverty and ignorance.

But the Arabs are in general extremely jealous of the honor of their
women. They would immediately stab a wife or daughter, who was
supposed to have disgraced herself. A single life is considered so
disrespectable, that a woman, in order to avoid it, will marry a man
very much her inferior, or even consent to be the second wife of one
already married.

The poor Arabs live in small thatched huts, and sleep on straw mats.
Those who are richer have low houses of stone with terrace roofs; and
here and there may be found an extraordinary individual, who has sofas,
carpets, mirrors, and fountains. Those whose circumstances do not
admit of their having separate apartments for women, are careful, when
they invite any one to the house, to enter before him, and cry aloud,
_Tarick! Tarick!_ (Retire! Retire!) At this warning all the females
immediately hide themselves.

If the wife of a Bedouin is seduced, the laws allow him to kill any of
the offender’s family whom he may happen to meet. Sometimes the affair
is settled by the seducer’s father giving the injured husband three or
four of his daughters to sell, for as high a price as he can obtain.

The Kereks are not so kind to their wives as the Bedouins, with whom
they often intermarry. A woman cannot inherit the merest trifle of
her husband’s property. Even during his lifetime he does not supply
her with necessary clothing; she is obliged to beg of her father, or
steal her husband’s wheat, and sell it clandestinely. No greater insult
can be offered to a Kerek than to tell him he sleeps under the same
blanket with his wife; for they do not allow the women to share their
apartments. When a wife is ill, they send her back to her parents,
saying they paid for a healthy woman, and cannot have the expense of an
invalid. Butter is used very freely by this tribe, and they consider
it the height of meanness to _sell_ it. A butter-seller is a most
contemptuous epithet; and the daughters of such a parsimonious person
would have no chance to get husbands.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Courds, who dwell in the mountains between Turkey and Persia,
live in tents, and subsist by plunder, like the Bedouin Arabs. Their
women are of a pale mahogany hue, with very fine features. The nose is
generally aquiline, the eyes bright and mild, and the whole countenance
expressive of kindness and frankness. The Courds have the utmost
confidence in their wives and daughters. They may be seen at the
tent-doors and in the fields, without veils, and always ready to answer
a civil question, or pay a stranger the simple duties of hospitality.
Both as maidens and matrons they are very virtuous and modest. These
women are active, vigorous, and fearless, and they educate their
children in the same way. “Our boys will be soldiers,” say they; “and
they must learn to bear and dare every thing. We show them the way.”

The Courds, like most people of similar habits, receive a certain price
for the daughters they dispose of in marriage.

       *       *       *       *       *

The inhabitants of Afghanistan are Mohammedans; of course women are
considered as property; and the higher classes are kept scrupulously
concealed. But they are an active, romantic people, and have more
gallantry than usually characterizes the Moslem religion. The women are
industrious in household avocations, and the labors of the distaff
and the loom; but they are not required to perform out-of-door work.
Owing to the nature of Mohammedan customs and institutions, love and
courtship are little known in Moslem nations; but among the Afghans
a man often plights his faith to a young woman, goes off to remote
provinces, and makes the most laborious exertions to earn money
sufficient to purchase her of her friends.

       *       *       *       *       *

People of all tribes and languages may be found about the beautiful
regions of Caucasus. They are generally handsome, vigorous, active,
hospitable, cunning, and dishonest.

The Circassians and Georgians have been most celebrated. Among the
Circassians, pride of birth is carried to such an extent, that it is
said an unequal match was never heard of in that country.

They are very fond of hunting and military exploits; and women, of
course, participate in this character. They polish and take care of the
armor, are very proud of their husband’s courage, and reproach them
severely when defeated. The young men show great activity and skill in
military exercises, and the most alert has the privilege of choosing
the most beautiful girl as his partner at the next ball. Their dances
are in the elaborate Asiatic style, less gay, graceful, and expressive
than those of Europe.

When a Circassian prince wishes to marry, he pays the father of the
princess the value of two thousand rubles, in arms, horses, and cattle;
and his father-in-law gives him a number of slaves in return. The
prince of Circassia demanded from the neighboring prince of Mingrelia
an hundred slaves loaded with tapestry, an hundred cows, an hundred
oxen, and an hundred horses, as the price of his sister. The birth of a
child, especially a boy, is celebrated with great festivities. A female
infant has a wide leathern belt sewed around the waist, which continues
till it bursts, and is then replaced by another. The bridegroom cuts
this belt with his dagger, and on account of its extreme tightness
fatal accidents sometimes occur.

The children of princes are not brought up at home, but sent soon after
their birth to the house of some nobleman, who is charged with their
guardianship. The expenses of their education and marriage are paid by
the noblemen, who receive no remuneration from the parents.

A Circassian dwelling is divided into two parts, separated from each
other by an inclosed court; one allotted to the husband and such
guests as he chooses to invite, the other to the wife and family. If a
European were to ask a Circassian concerning the health of his wife, he
would angrily turn his back without condescending to reply. The lower
classes, as usual, have more freedom than the higher; they often go
abroad without veils.

Girls marry between their twelfth and sixteenth year, and are
considered quite old at eighteen. Their mothers teach them to
embroider, and make dresses for themselves and their male relations.
On the wedding day the father of the bride makes her a present, but
he reserves the greater portion of what he intends to give her, until
the birth of her first child. On this occasion she visits him, receives
the remainder of her portion, and is clothed for the first time in the
matron’s dress and veil.

If there be rival lovers, they often decide the question by single
combat, or engage friends in the quarrel, and the victorious party
seizes the prize. If the bridegroom can prove any thing against the
former character of his bride, he sends her back to her parents, who
generally sell her as a slave. An unfaithful wife has her hair shaved,
her ears clipped, and the sleeves of her robe cut off, and in this
situation is sent home to her father on horseback, to be sold as a
slave.

The Circassians have two kinds of divorce; one total, and the other
provisional. In the first case both parties are immediately at liberty
to marry again; in the other, the couple agree to separate for a year,
and if at the end of that time the husband does not send for his wife,
her relatives compel him to a solemn divorce, that she may be able
to marry again. After the death of the husband, the wife governs the
family, without dividing the property among the children. When she
dies, the wife of the eldest son usually takes her place; the children
can then demand a division of the fortune, the oldest receiving the
largest share. At funerals, women utter loud cries of grief, and
disfigure themselves with scars. They wear black for mourning.

The Circassians, like the Arabs, are remarkable for hospitality. They
will incur any dangers to protect a person that has eaten of their
food. Should the enemies of a stranger attempt to seize him in the
house of a Circassian, the wife of his host would give him milk from
her own breast, in token of adoption; and from that moment all the
tribe would feel bound to avenge his wrongs, as if he were a brother.

The Circassian women have been celebrated throughout the world for
their beauty. Some modern travellers have denied their claims to
such great celebrity. Dr. Kimmel says, “I have met with none of
extraordinary beauty; and officers who have long commanded in the
Caucasus have informed me that Circassian beauties are extremely rare.”

But it must be remembered that women of the higher classes are
rigorously excluded from the sight of a traveller; and in a country
where the feudal system prevails to its utmost extent, the handsome
daughter of a serf would be immediately claimed by her noble master,
who could sell her for the royal harems, or reserve her for himself, as
he saw fit.

Women of rank embroider, weave elegant baskets, and other ornamental
things. The lower class tend the flocks, weave garments for the men,
and do a variety of household and out-door work. The serfs are the only
class who continue to live with a wife after she grows old. It is an
uncommon thing for any man or woman, even among the princes, to know
how to read or write.

The condition of the Georgians is very similar to that of their
neighbors the Circassians.

The Georgian women are very remarkable for beauty; but are said to be
wanton, treacherous, and uncleanly. A great trade in female slaves
has been carried on in Georgia. Fathers sell their children, brothers
their sisters, and nobles their vassals. Jewish agents are continually
traversing the provinces about Caucasus, seeking the fairest flowers
for the harems of Turkey and Persia. A handsome, red-haired girl will
sell in Constantinople for six or seven thousand piastres.

The Georgian women are tasteful and elegant in their dress, and great
pains are taken to perfect them in those voluptuous arts of pleasing,
which the Orientals call female accomplishments.

The men being almost always engaged in war, or hunting, there is very
little companionship between the sexes.

The Armenians are Christians; but their customs with regard to women
are very similar to the Turks, excepting that their laws do not permit
a plurality of wives. They keep their wives and daughters as rigorously
excluded as the Turks do theirs. A man never sees the face of the woman
he is to marry, and courtship is a thing unknown.

The mother of a young man generally selects a bride for him, and makes
all necessary arrangements concerning the dowry, bridal presents, &c.
The nature of these presents are regulated by old laws and usages, and
each article is blessed by a priest.

When the bridegroom goes to bring his bride from her father’s house
to his own, his father-in-law gives him a new watch, and the nearest
female relations hang pieces of gold tinsel on his hat. He is
introduced to the bride, who sits on a low sofa, so completely buried
in dresses, that not so much as the tip of her shoe is visible. A
thick white linen veil, called the _perkem_, used only for bridals, is
thrown over her head; over this is another veil composed of tinsel,
or sheets of gilt paper. Her hair flows down, and, joined to a mass
of false hair, rests upon the sofa. The priest leads her blindfolded
to the centre of the room, places her hand in that of the bridegroom,
and pronounces a blessing. All the company then form in procession;
a priest goes first with a lighted torch, and is followed by the
bridegroom; the march is closed by the bride, who, being unable to
see for herself, is led by female relations. When they arrive at the
bridegroom’s house, the bride is smoked with incense, and sprinkled
with rose-water. She is then led to her apartments, and left with the
women. The bridegroom proceeds to his apartment, where he is shaved
and dressed in his wedding suit, every article of which is blessed by
the priest, as he presents it. The couple are then led forth to the
centre of another apartment, where the priest again joins their hands,
and knocks their foreheads gently together. One of the family waves a
crucifix over them, they again touch foreheads, and continue to lean
against each other, while the priest chants some passages from the
gospel. When he has done singing, the priest produces two strings
exactly alike, made of white and rose-colored silk interwoven together.
He ties one round the brow of the bridegroom, over whom the crucifix is
held, and asks, with a solemn pause between each question, “If she is
blind, thou acceptest her?” “If she is lame, thou acceptest her?” “If
she is hump-backed, thou acceptest her?”

To each question the bridegroom answers, “I accept.” The other silken
string is then tied round the brow of the bride, over whom the crucifix
is held. The priest says, “Thou acceptest.” She answers, “I accept.”

The company then shower small pieces of money on the couple, the cross
is waved, and the priests chant. All the men quit the room for a short
time, while the matrons remove a quantity of the robes and veils, under
which the bride is well nigh stifled. At a given signal, the husband is
admitted, and allowed to see, for an instant, the countenance of his
wife.

All the company then pass in. The bride is not again enveloped with the
linen veil, but her face is covered with the tinsel and gold paper. The
female guests kiss her, and put presents in her hand. After this, all
the male relations, to the remotest degree, are allowed a glance at the
bride’s face, and the favor of kissing her hand.

Feasting and amusements then commence, and continue for three days. All
this time the bride is obliged to sit motionless on the sofa; it would
be considered the height of indecorum for her even to whisper to any
one, except the old matron who accompanied her from her father’s house,
and who is generally her nurse.

Toward the end of the third day, the priest leads the bridegroom to the
bride, removes the silken strings from their brows, and carries away
the tinsel veil. The bride is now, for the first time, permitted to
speak. According to the old laws, she was not allowed to open her lips
in the presence of her mother-in-law, or her married sister-in-law,
for one year; the practice is now less rigid, but the most profound
respect, and implicit obedience, is still exacted from the bride toward
the relatives of her husband.

The marriages even of the poorest Armenians take place with all this
ceremony and parade. Cooking utensils, robes, veils, &c., are kept
stored in the churches, for the use of those who cannot afford to buy
them for the occasion.

The dress of the Armenian ladies is remarkably heavy and loaded,
and their ornaments large and massive. They have black eyes, ruddy
complexions, and in general coarse features, with little expression.
When they go out, the face is muffled up with bandages so as to show
only the eyes, and sometimes a part of the nose. In the house, as well
as abroad, and by night as well as by day, they wear a nose band, the
pressure of which makes that feature universally broad and flat. They
allow none of their hair to be seen, except a long braid that falls
down the back nearly to the ground. The custom of muffling themselves
up, so that all look nearly alike, led Tournefort to say, facetiously,
“An Armenian returning from a journey is not sure to find the same
wife; he cannot tell whether she may not be dead, and whether some
other woman may not have stepped into the place of the deceased.”

The Armenian salutation, on entering a room, is to place the right
hand rapidly to the breast, mouth, and forehead. The ladies throw off
their slippers before they sit down. The manner of lowering themselves
upon the divan, so as to assume the oriental posture, is said to
be altogether inimitable by a European. For the sake of change in
position, they sometimes kneel.

Xenophon, in his Cyropædia, relates a beautiful anecdote of an Armenian
wife in very ancient times. The princes of the country having evaded
the payment of their customary tribute to Persia, Cyrus made war upon
them, and took the royal family prisoners. Tigranes, the king’s son,
had been recently married to a woman for whom he had very great love.
The Persian monarch asked the prince what price he would give to regain
her. Tigranes with great fervor replied, “Oh, Cyrus, I would save her
from servitude at the expense of my life!” The noble conqueror replied,
“Take your own to yourself; and do you, Armenian king, take your wife
and children, without payment, that they may know they come free to
you.”

When the Armenians returned home, all were talking of the magnanimity,
mildness, and beauty of Cyrus. Tigranes said to his wife, “And do you,
Armenian dame, think Cyrus so very handsome?” “Truly,” said she, “I did
not look at him.” “At whom then did you look?” inquired her husband.
“At the man who said he would ransom me at the expense of his own
life,” she replied.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Turks as Mohammedans may have four wives, and as many mistresses as
they can maintain; but the common class of people rarely have more than
one wife.

The Grand Sultan cannot marry one of his own subjects, and Christian
princesses would not in general be willing to form one of his numerous
harem, even if such an alliance were not regarded as an abomination by
the Moslems. His household is therefore composed of beautiful female
slaves, usually presented by the first grandees of the empire, as one
of the surest methods of obtaining royal favor. The heir apparent is
consequently always the “son of a slave;” a contemptuous epithet often
applied to him in the hour of adversity.

Orkhan, the second emperor of the Turks, is the only one on whom
a Christian princess was bestowed. Theodora, of the Greek empire,
daughter of Cantacuzene and Irene, was given to the powerful Turk by
her ambitious father, though he was well aware that he previously had
many wives and favorites. No marriage ceremonies were performed; but
the troops were assembled round a throne, on which Theodora was seated
concealed by silken curtains. At a signal from the emperor, the screens
were withdrawn, and the bride discovered in the midst of kneeling
eunuchs and blazing torches; while the joyful sound of trumpets and
other instruments of music welcomed her appearance. Her father had
stipulated that she should be allowed to preserve her religion in the
midst of the harem, and he wrote much in praise of her charity and
devotion in this difficult situation.

Achmet I. is said to have had three thousand women in his harem, and
the grandees of the empire generally have some hundreds. The rigid
seclusion of Mohammedan women is said to have originated in the
conduct of Ayesha, called Best Beloved Wife of the Prophet, and Mother
of the Faithful. She went out into the desert to look for a pearl
necklace she had lost, and on her return was accused of listening to
the smooth words of an officer she met. Mohammed did not withdraw his
affection, and publicly protested her innocence; but keenly alive to
the disgraceful report, he expressly forbade any Mussulman to speak to
his wives, or to remain in his house after dinner, or to enter it in
his absence.

Harem is an Arabic word signifying sanctuary. These retreats are so
carefully guarded, that little is known of their interior arrangements.
Physicians, and the wives of European ambassadors, have sometimes
gained access to seraglios, which they describe as follows: Favorites
of the highest rank are called _khatouns_, of which there are seven.
She who first presents the Sultan with a son becomes the _sultana
hasseki_, and takes precedence of the others. Next in rank to the
khatouns are the _odahlycs_, whose number is unlimited. Each of the
khatouns has a seventh part of the odahlycs, and a certain number of
eunuchs and slaves as her own peculiar attendants; and each has a
separate court, garden, and bath, belonging to the pavilion in which
she resides. These pavilions are adorned with marble, paintings in
arabesque, gilding, mirrors, &c. The odahlycs, generally to the amount
of some hundreds, sleep on sofas in a long high gallery, divided by
a double row of chests of drawers, where they keep their clothing.
The staircases to this gallery are secured by massive trap-doors,
fastened with bars of iron. The inner courts of the harem are guarded
by black eunuchs, with muskets always in their hands, and the outer
by white eunuchs. Innumerable subordinate officers are appointed to
settle disputes, and keep order within and around the harem. When any
of the Sultan’s women accompany him into the gardens, officers are
in readiness to warn the gardeners and all other men to retire; and
should any one be slow to obey, he would be killed on the spot. When
the king’s women are removed from one seraglio to another, they are
accompanied by officers with staves to keep off the people, and to
prevent the ladies from showing themselves by drawing the curtains of
their litters. When ill the women are always attended by their own sex.
Physicians are admitted into the harem only under the strictest guard,
and on extraordinary occasions; even then they are not permitted to
see their patients, except through gauze. Notwithstanding all these
precautions, intrigues are sometimes successfully carried on. If
discovered, the woman is tied up in a sack and drowned; but the Koran
ordains that he who accuses a woman without being able to prove her
guilt, shall receive the bastinado.

The mother of the reigning Sultan is called _sultana valydeh_; a title
which she assumes at his accession, and loses whenever he dies, or
is deposed. Her sons treat her with the most unbounded respect, and
give her almost supreme control in the harem. Her political influence
is likewise by no means inconsiderable. The grand seignior often
communicates to her the secrets of state; covered with a veil, she
holds conferences with the grand vizier and the mufti; and in the
absence of her son, she issues orders in his name. In the time of
Achmet III., the sultana valydeh warmly espoused the cause of Charles
XII. of Sweden, and made great exertions to arm Turkey against Russia,
in his behalf. She even wrote letters to the king of Sweden, and to
count Poniatowski, though such a step was in open defiance of the laws
of the harem. The revenues of certain provinces belong to the sultana
mother, and in times of emergency she often lends large sums to his
Highness.

The sultana valydeh and the sultana hasseki almost always dislike
each other, because each is jealous of the other’s influence over
the reigning monarch. The hasseki finds it prudent to dissemble her
hatred, for fear of giving offence to the Sultan; and the valydeh on
her part, while she refrains from openly wounding the affections of her
imperious son, generally contrives all manner of secret and indirect
means to injure his favorite. It sometimes happens, however, that the
hasseki is so perfectly passive and submissive as to be a favorite both
with mother and son.

If the heir apparent dies, the hasseki loses her rank, and the next
khatoun who has a son takes her place.

This gives rise to the strongest feelings of rivalship, envy, and
hatred. No pains are spared by the khatouns to destroy the offspring,
injure the health, or vex the feelings of those odahlycs in whom they
are fearful of finding rivals.

The sultana Guneche (a name which signifies _the sun_) had acquired
great influence over Mohammed IV. by her beauty, excellent
understanding, and perpetual flow of spirits. In the height of her
power, the sultana mother was malicious enough to introduce to her son
a lovely Circassian slave, named Gulbeyaz, or the _white rose_. The
effect produced upon the mind of the voluptuous monarch was precisely
what she wished: Guneche soon received intimation that apartments and
a sultana’s train were in preparation for the new favorite. She stole
to the chamber of her rival, and after loading her with the bitterest
invectives, beat her so cruelly that the whole harem was in an uproar.
The Sultan provided Gulbeyaz with another residence six leagues
distant, and threatened to treat Guneche as a slave. She, however,
made her peace with him, by attributing her rash conduct to excess of
love, and expressing her determination in future to sacrifice her own
feelings to the gratification of her _lion_, as the sultanas fondly
call his Highness.

But afterward her jealousy showed itself in a still worse form. The
Sultan had received from the grand vizier a most beautiful slave, named
Khadyjeh. With a view to her safety, he conveyed her to a seraglio on
the canal of the Black sea. For a time, Guneche appeared to have no
suspicion of the frequent visits he paid her. But one day when the
grand seignior had gone a hunting some distance from Constantinople,
she ordered caïques to be secretly prepared for an excursion on the
canal. On her arrival at the seraglio where Khadyjeh was confined, she
affected to wish to enter the pavilion to rest. The new favorite was
engaged in the innocent amusement of angling, in a closet that overhung
the sea. Her vindictive rival came softly behind her, and suddenly
pushed her into the waves, from which she rose no more.

The heir to the throne remains under the tuition of his mother until
he is eight or nine years old, and custom, as well as the rules of the
Koran, require from him the most implicit and reverential obedience.
The day on which this important little personage is delivered over to
male instructers is celebrated with great pomp. A recent traveller thus
describes the ceremonies that took place when the oldest son of Sultan
Mahmoud was nearly nine years old: “The extensive plain of Ibraham Aga,
on the Asiatic shore, was covered with tents for the accommodation of
troops of children, of whom six thousand were present. The Sultan was
seated on a throne in a splendid pavilion, supported by gilded columns,
hung with gold and silver tissue. The young prince was introduced to
all the chief officers of the empire, and after respectfully embracing
his father’s feet he took his seat on a cushion near him. A chapter
from the Koran was read, and a prayer pronounced by the grand mufti.
At every pause all the children throughout the camp cried Amen, and it
was echoed by the neighboring hills. Food is distributed and criminals
pardoned in honor of the occasion. The festival lasts three days; and
during all this time, men, women, and children remain in the field.
The troops, the long line of tents, the noisy children, and women
in all manner of gay costumes, riding in their painted and carved
arabahs, drawn by oxen, combine to make the scene very cheerful and
exhilarating.”

In many instances the Sultans, when they ascended the throne, have
caused all their brothers to be put to death, to prevent any disputes
about succession. Amurat III. caused his five brothers to be killed in
the presence of their own mothers, one of whom, unable to endure the
sight, stabbed herself in despair. He likewise put to death two of his
father’s slaves, who were likely to become mothers. Mohammed III., son
and successor of Amurat, caused nineteen brothers to be strangled, and
ten of his father’s odahlycs to be thrown into the sea, for the same
reason.

The khatouns occasionally make each other a ceremonious visit, probably
from motives of curiosity; but their meals, baths, and amusements, are
distinct from each other. They change their dresses many times a day,
smoke, chew gum mastic, and loll on sofas, while female slaves dance
around them, and perform pantomimes, which almost always represent
love scenes. They have likewise magic lanterns and puppet shows, the
subjects of which are said to be any thing but modest. One of their
favorite occupations is making beads of rose leaves. The petals of
the rose are carefully picked, and pounded into a smooth paste in
an iron vessel. The iron, acting upon a certain acid in the rose,
turns the paste quite black. It is made into little balls, which are
perforated for stringing, and hung up in the shade to dry. When hard
they are rubbed between the hands with a little attar of rose, till
they become perfectly smooth. They never lose their fragrance. The
Turkish ladies spend hours in passing these beads backward and forward
on a string, inhaling the delicate perfume. They practise dancing,
music, and embroidery, in the cool kiosks or pavilions, situated in
the midst of the gardens. Here Frank and Greek women are sometimes
admitted to exhibit goods and jewelry for sale, and Jewesses skilled in
fortune-telling, amulets, and love-potions, are always welcome.

A visit from any lady of distinction, either from a foreign nation
or some distant part of the empire, is an extraordinary occasion,
and conducted with much ceremony. If the visiter be a European, they
manifest the greatest curiosity concerning those Christian countries
where they have been told each man has but one wife. At parting, the
guests are usually presented with embroidered handkerchiefs, and
sprinkled by the attendants with perfumed waters.

The Sultan sometimes indulges his women in what is called the Feast of
Lamps, which consists in a general illumination of the gardens of the
seraglio with colored lamps and reflecting mirrors. Booths are erected
for the festival, furnished with a variety of goods, and with vases
full of beautiful flowers. The sisters, nieces, and female cousins of
the grand seignior are invited. The women of the harem, in appropriate
dresses, tend the bazar, while the Sultan and his guests walk about
purchasing jewelry and rich stuffs, which they present to each other.
Dancing, music, and sports of various kinds continue till late at night.

The women of the harem try to obtain as many jewels as they can,
because in case of their master’s death these are not taken away from
them. In the midst of slaughter, the most ruffianly soldier considers
the walls of the harem as sacred; and when executioners are sent to
strangle a state criminal and seize his effects, they do not enter his
seraglio, or touch any property that belongs to his women.

The Sultan’s daughters and sisters enjoy more liberty than any of his
favorites. Not being heirs to the throne, they are not exposed to the
perils that await his brothers and sons. While these girls are yet in
their cradles, a husband is provided for them, generally among wealthy
pachas; and as soon as he dies, they are provided with another; who
(with a view to securing his wealth for the royal coffers) is very
likely to be accused of some crime and soon strangled. Thus a sister of
Amurat IV. had four husbands in less than one year.

If the sultana be ever so old or ugly, a man dare not refuse the honor
of her alliance, if he values his head. During the reign of Abdul
Hamyd, an old sultana fell in love with a handsome and wealthy young
man, whom she saw pass her windows during a public ceremony. The young
man was thunder-struck when the Sultan made known the honor that
awaited him; for he had an excellent wife, whom he most tenderly loved.
But there was no escape for him. Had he attempted to fly, his capture
and death would have been almost certain. He was compelled to dismiss
his wife, who survived their separation but a few days.

The individual thus chosen is summoned to the presence of the Sultan,
where he waits till the presiding khatoun comes and makes a signal
that he is to follow her into the harem. At the threshold, the eunuchs
take off his slippers, and make him wait some minutes, in token of the
obedience he owes his royal consort. When he enters, he makes three
obeisances, kneels, bows his face to the ground, and repeats a short
prayer. The khatoun then conducts him to his bride, who sits on a
sofa, entirely covered with a veil of red taffeta. She treats him
with the utmost haughtiness, which he tries to soften by magnificent
presents. The slaves bring a tray containing sugar-candy and a pair
of pigeons. The bridegroom offers some of the pigeon to the sultana,
and she offers him candy. He expresses his felicity in terms the most
reverential. The sound of various instruments then gives him notice to
retire from the apartments of the women, and feasting and amusement
is kept up till late in the night. If the bride be past the years of
infancy, she is conducted to her husband’s residence with great pomp.

Some writers have affirmed that a part of these marriage ceremonies
consists in the Sultan’s saying to his sister, or daughter, “I give
this man to be thy slave. If he offends, cut off his head;” and that
the bride actually wears a sabre in token of her authority. Whether
this be true or not, there cannot easily be any other bond than fear,
in an alliance where one word of complaint from the wife would bring an
executioner to strangle the husband.

The female relations of the Sultan are never allowed to quit
Constantinople, lest their sons should escape the power of the despot,
and occasion disturbances in the succession to the throne. When the
Sultan dies, his women are shut up in what is called the old seraglio.
If his successor be his son or brother, it is sacrilegious for him ever
to look upon them; if otherwise, the love of novelty sometimes leads
him among them to select new favorites.

But the seraglios of the Sultan and his grandees do not furnish a
true picture of the character and condition of the Turkish women; any
more than the royal marriages and etiquette of European courts are
indicative of the manners of the people. Women of the middling classes
in Turkey appear to enjoy a very considerable degree of freedom and
consideration. It is even said that hen-pecked husbands are as numerous
there as elsewhere. Their houses are indeed divided into separate
apartments, one portion devoted to the men and the other to the women.
Sometimes these apartments communicate only by one door, of which the
husband holds the key; and the food of the women is conveyed to them by
means of a revolving cupboard, similar to those by which the poor are
supplied with food at the gate of convents. But, generally speaking,
the Turkish women go in and out at their pleasure. The streets and
bazars of Constantinople are full of them. They seldom address a
stranger, or reply if spoken to; but if any thing peculiarly attracts
their curiosity, they ask questions with much simplicity. Their
favorite recreation is an excursion on the Bosphorus, the arrangements
for which are made with very little ceremony. A lady sends her servants
to invite her female friends, orders the provisions to be carried
with them, gives directions for her husband’s dinner, steps into her
caique,[1] calls for her friend, proceeds up the Golden Horn, selects
some pleasant scene where the children can frolic under the shade
of lofty trees, and there they remain working, talking, singing, and
playing on the thambourah,[2] till the declining sun gives them warning
to return. Sometimes the husbands join in these excursions, and sit in
a group apart from the ladies, smoking, and sipping sherbet and coffee,
while female slaves amuse them with dancing and singing. Trustworthy
attendants always accompany the ladies on these occasions, to protect
them from intrusion. It would be considered extremely indecorous for a
stranger to approach the group.

These excursions on the canals are said to be sometimes the scenes
of love-intrigues, carried on by means of signals from those in the
neighboring houses to those in the boats. The police officers are on
the watch for such misdemeanors; how often their vigilance is eluded,
is best known to those who reside near the Bosphorus. The natural love
of overcoming obstacles is a strong incentive to intrigue, and the
custom of wearing veils favors concealment. In case of detection, the
prompt punishment of despotic countries follows without much ceremony.
All the public know, is that some woman is seen hanging lifeless from
her own window, with her lover, or supposed lover, by her side; or that
her body, inclosed in a sack, is found floating on the Bosphorus.

In former times the Turks considered it so improper to display a
female face, that they used to fire at English merchant-ships the
figure-head of which represented a woman; but the custom of veiling the
face, by a muslin tied over the mouth and chin, is gradually going out
of fashion, especially with the young.

The Turkish ladies spend some of their most agreeable hours in the
public baths appropriated to their use. These baths are lighted by bell
glasses at the top, and consist of apartments of different degrees of
temperature. The last room is so hot that high wooden clogs must be
worn to protect the feet from the pavement, and a sudden perspiration
trickles from the pores at the moment of entrance. Yet the women go
very frequently, and sometimes remain in this atmosphere five or six
hours, while their attendants rub them with a kind of brush, and pull
the joints till they crack. This operation, at first a little painful,
is said to be followed by a sensation peculiarly agreeable. Having made
plentiful use of perfumed soap and pomatum, braided their tresses, and
pared their nails, the bathers pass into the next room, the temperature
of which is lower. Here clean beds are prepared for delicious repose
after the relaxation of the bath. Coffee and cordials are likewise
furnished in this room, and sometimes a whole party of women dine
there, and stay till evening, listening to stories, and discussing the
important affairs of love and dress.

Turkish women generally have a sallow complexion with dark eyes. A
face like a full moon, and a person decidedly fleshy, are among their
requisites for beauty. The grandees are said to place a peculiar value
upon fair-haired girls, probably on account of their rarity.

The wedding ceremonies are simple. All the relations send presents of
furniture, clothes, or jewels, which are the property of the wife in
case of her husband’s death. Sometimes, when the marriage contracts are
signed, a solemn promise is exacted from the man that he will never
marry again during the lifetime of his wife. The bridal ceremony is
performed by an iman or priest, who joins the hands of the parties, and
recites certain prayers from the Koran. It sometimes takes place at
the bridegroom’s house, but more generally at a mosque. The day before
the wedding the bride goes to the bath, where her female relations and
friends take off her dress, sing a bridal song, and offer their various
gifts. The parties are escorted to the mosque in state, accompanied
by friends and relations in arabahs,[3] drawn by oxen decorated with
ribbons and garlands. The arabah in which the bride is conveyed is
closed, but the others are open. The bridal veil is bright red bordered
with yellow. The eyebrows of the bride are united in one broad black
streak, by means of antimony and gall nuts; and her fingers are stained
with hennah. When the new part of the nail forms a contrast with the
stained part, it is considered peculiarly beautiful. Sometimes a
childish love of ornament is carried so far, that gilt paper cut in
the form of crescents, and various fantastic shapes, are stuck upon
the face. Before the arabah which contains the bride are borne several
trees surrounded with hoops, from which hang festoons of gold thread
or tinsel, which wave in the breeze, and glitter when the sun glances
on them. The procession consists of dancers, musicians, mountebanks,
horses loaded with the furniture and apparel of the bride, and the
relatives and friends on horseback, or in carriages.

When the bridegroom leaves the mosque, his friends strike him smartly
on the shoulders for good luck. Girls are usually betrothed at the age
of three or four years, and receive the nuptial benediction at twelve
or fourteen. The custom of not allowing the bridegroom to see the bride
until after the ceremony is contrary to the precepts of the Koran; for
Mohammed says to one of his disciples, who was about to take a wife,
“First see her, that you may judge how you should like to live with
her.”

The wedding festivities last four days; the men feasting and frolicking
in one set of apartments, the women in another. They usually begin
on Monday, to avoid interfering with the Mohammedan Sabbath, which
comes on Friday. A single life is very disreputable, and widows almost
invariably marry again, unless they are very old. A Turkish woman is
respected by her family and the world in proportion to the number of
her children. In general they have very numerous claims to this kind of
distinction. The Koran declares that a woman who dies unmarried is in
a state of reprobation.

The common idea that Mohammedans believe women have no souls, is not
founded upon any thing contained in the Koran. Mohammed expressly says:
“Whoso worketh good, male or female, shall enter paradise;” and the
pilgrimage to Mecca, for the salvation of their souls, is enjoined upon
women as well as men, with the proviso that they must be accompanied by
their husbands, or near male relations.

The Mohammedan law forbids pigs, dogs, women, and other impure animals
to enter a mosque; and the hour of prayers must not be proclaimed
by a female, a madman, a drunkard, or a decrepit person. The first
prohibition was no doubt intended to prevent the frequent meetings
between the sexes which would be likely to take place during religious
services. The last regulation implies no peculiar contempt for women;
the same classes would be excluded from the priesthood in Christian
countries.

The Turkish proverb, that “A woman causes the ruin or prosperity of a
house,” implies that female influence is in some degree acknowledged
and appreciated.

Jests at the expense of women prevail in Turkey, as they do all over
the world. Nass-red-dyn, the Turkish Æsop, wishing to propitiate the
conquering Tamerlane, proposed to carry him some fruit. “Hold,” said
he, “two heads are better than one; I will ask my wife whether I had
better carry quinces or figs.” His wife replied, “Quinces will please
him best, because they are larger and finer.” “However useful the
advice of others may be,” rejoined Nass-red-dyn, “it is never well to
follow that of a woman; I am determined to take figs.”

When he arrived in the camp, Tamerlane amused himself with throwing the
figs at his bald head. At every blow Nass-red-dyn exclaimed, “God be
praised!” Tamerlane inquired what he meant. “I am thanking God that I
did not follow my wife’s advice,” replied Nass-red-dyn; “for if I had
brought quinces instead of figs, I should certainly have a broken head.”

Women do not attend funerals in Turkey, the ceremonies of which are
very simple. At the death of a husband they put on a particular kind
of head-dress, and wear no ornaments for twelve months. At the grave
the iman repeats a prayer, and calls the deceased three times by
his name, and by that of his mother, never by his father’s. If the
mother’s name be unknown, they call him “son of Mary,” the blessed
virgin; if the deceased be a woman under similar circumstances, they
call her “daughter of Eve.” A column with a sculptured turban on the
top designates the grave of a man; a kind of vase, or marble bowl, is
placed on the top of columns erected for women. After a rain, the birds
come to these vases to drink. In Syria, Armenia, and Turkey, the color
of mourning is celestial blue.

In 1755, Othman III. made very severe ordinances with regard to women.
He forbade their going abroad on Friday; would not allow them to do
their own shopping; (that task being transferred to their husbands
and male relations;) ordered them to wear coarse dull-colored cloth
instead of fine Cashmeres; and made an express edict against their high
head-dresses. The women, to avoid this last ordinance, contrived a
species of machinery by which they could suddenly diminish their caps,
and raise them again, when the police officers were out of sight.

These regulations were but temporary. The wives and daughters of the
wealthy Turks dress with extreme magnificence. Rich colored damask
brocades embroidered with silver and gold, and looped up with buttons
of diamond or pearl, are much worn. Though the national costume remains
the same, fashion plays a thousand freaks with the details of dress.

The Turks do not consider it polite to make inquiries concerning each
other’s wives. Among the class of vicious women in cities the number
of Mohammedans is said to be very small, because the laws restraining
them are peculiarly severe. If it be discovered that a Mohammedan woman
has a Christian lover, he is compelled to marry her, and renounce his
religion.

Perhaps there is no country where slavery exists in so mild a form as
in Turkey. The children of slaves are brought up in the same way as the
legitimate children, and enjoy the same privileges and rights. Female
slaves are free by law at the end of six years, and allowed to form the
most advantageous marriages they can.

Instances are numerous of slaves rising to the highest dignities of the
empire. The black eunuchs of the seraglio often acquire immense wealth
and influence.

It is a singular fact, that the Mohammedan nations treat slaves better
than the Christian; and that, among Christians, the Catholic nations
treat them better than the Protestant.

Both European and Asiatic Turkey have been described under the head of
Asia, because their manners and customs are so decidedly and entirely
oriental.

Of the Asiatic Greeks nothing is here said, because their character and
condition is essentially the same as that of the Greeks in Europe.

Numerous Frank and Armenian merchants reside in Smyrna, the manners
and costumes of which are a curious combination of various nations.
It seems very odd to travellers to meet ladies with English or French
names, wearing the Turkish or Greek costume, and speaking the Greek
language. The Carnival is celebrated at Smyrna with extraordinary
splendor. On this occasion the ladies appear in their richest attire,
and there is a continual succession of waltzing parties, concerts, and
theatricals.

The wealthy Frank merchants residing in Turkey are extremely cautious
in arranging the marriage contracts of their daughters. The bridegroom
engages to secure his wife a certain portion of his fortune, in case
she survives him, and receives, on his part, a written promise from her
father of the money, jewels, clothes, &c. constituting the dowry, and
of the portion he intends to leave her at his death.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Persians seem to have been remarkable among the ancient nations for
a savage jealousy of women, which led them to keep the objects of their
love perpetually imprisoned and guarded. Their severity is spoken of as
extraordinary, by Plutarch, and other authors, who wrote at a period
when even the most enlightened nations allowed very little freedom
to their women. Yet the Persians are said to have been the first who
carried their wives and children into the field of battle: “We do it,”
said they, “that the sight of all that is most dear to us, may animate
us to fight more valiantly in their defence.”

The Medes and Persians are likewise supposed to have been the first who
introduced dancing and singing women to entertain their guests at a
banquet; but the fact that Cyrus gave two captive female musicians to
his uncle Cyaxares, proves that music was cultivated at a very early
period, by nations which yielded to the dominion of Persia.

The character of Cyrus is the brightest page in Persian history. At a
time when female captives taken in war were treated with the utmost
indignity, and sometimes with savage barbarity, he was distinguished
for a degree of respectful gallantry, which would have done credit to
the most refined prince of modern times.

When told that the exquisitely beautiful wife of Abradatas had been
assigned to him among other spoils of the Assyrian camp, and that
the woman wept incessantly for her husband, to whom she was fondly
attached, Cyrus at once resolved not to see her, lest her unrivalled
loveliness should make it difficult for him to do his duty. In fact,
he protected her against himself, and against one of his favorite
officers, who, being appointed to attend upon the beautiful Panthea,
had become a captive to her charms. Nothing could exceed the gratitude
of the princess, when she found herself and her attendant maidens
living in the midst of the Persian camp with as much safety and
seclusion, as if she had been in the palace of her husband. Abradatas
having received information of the magnanimous conduct of Cyrus,
immediately hastened to engage himself, his troops and treasures, in
the service of the virtuous monarch. When he was about to go forth to
battle with Cyrus, Panthea brought him a golden helmet and arm-pieces,
with broad bracelets for his wrists, which without his knowledge
she had caused to be made from her own jewels. When he asked, with
affectionate surprise, if she had sacrificed her ornaments for him,
she replied that her husband was her greatest ornament. She then
reminded him of their obligations to Cyrus, and told him that much as
she loved him, she had rather be buried with him than live to know he
had been deficient in courage. Abradatas laid his hand gently on her
head, and looking upward, exclaimed, “O, great Jove, make me worthy of
such a wife as Panthea, and such a friend as Cyrus!” As the princess
put on his armor, she turned aside to conceal her tears; and when the
door of his chariot was closed, she kissed the steps by which he had
entered, and followed after him. When he perceived this, he again bade
her farewell, and entreated her to return. Her attendants placed her
on a litter, and threw a tent-covering over her, to conceal her from
the admiring troops. When the dead body of Abradatas was brought from
the battle, Panthea reproached herself that she had urged him to such
desperate courage. With the stern enthusiasm of ancient times, she
stabbed herself to the heart, and died on her husband’s breast; having
first given directions that their corpses should be wrapped in the
same mantle. The Persian monarch, with sincere lamentations, ordered
magnificent funeral rites, and a monument to be erected to their memory.

There is reason to suppose that Cyrus was blessed in his own domestic
relations; for we are told that he mourned for his wife Cassandana with
the sincerest grief, and commanded public demonstrations of sorrow
throughout the empire.

The virtuous decorum of Cyrus was an exception to the general character
of Persian princes. Men of rank, who could indulge their whims without
control, sometimes married their own sisters and daughters. Artaxerxes
Memnon, being in love with his beautiful daughter Atossa, had some
fears that the affair would not redound to his credit; but his mother
quieted these scruples by saying, “Are you not set over the Persians
by the gods, as the only rule of right and wrong?”

Another of the Persian kings called the magi together to give their
opinion on a similar occasion. The accommodating priests answered, “We
can find no law that authorizes a man to marry his own daughter; but
our laws authorize a king to do whatever he pleases.”

Some idea of the excessive voluptuousness of the Persian court in
ancient times may be derived from the account given of Ahasuerus.

By an old custom the queen had a right to ask any favor she thought
proper on the king’s birthday, and he was bound to grant it. Amestris,
the wife of Xemes, on one of these occasions, being filled with
vindictive jealousy, demanded that her sister-in-law should be mangled
in a most shocking manner and thrown to the dogs. The innocent victim,
who had in fact discouraged and resisted the king’s passion, was
destroyed in the most cruel manner.

The splendor which now characterizes Persian princes prevailed in
ancient times. The revenues of provinces were devoted to particular
articles of the queen’s wardrobe. This was implied by their names; one
being called the Queen’s Sandals, another the Queen’s Girdle, &c. The
use of false hair was not uncommon in Media and Persia.

The account given of Alexander’s marriage with the daughter of Darius
seems to imply that the ancient marriage ceremonies were very simple.
A great feast was prepared, the bride was seated beside her lover, he
took her hand and kissed her in presence of the assembled guests, and
she became his wife.

The ancient Persians considered matrimony so essential, that they
believed those who died single would infallibly be unhappy in another
world; for this reason, when a relation of either sex died unmarried,
they hired some person to be formally married to the deceased as soon
as possible.

It was considered a great misfortune to be childless. “Children,” said
the prophet Zerdhust, “are a bridge that reaches to paradise; and how
shall ye pass if he have provided no bridge? The angel shall ask every
soul, if he have provided children; if he answer, no, the soul that has
contributed so little to society shall himself be left desolate on the
banks of a river, where he shall see the fresh springs and blooming
fruits of paradise, but shall never be able to reach them.”

A boy was kept in the female apartments, and not permitted to see
his father, till his fifth year, in order that his parent might not
experience so much uneasiness in case he died before that period.

The slightest rudeness to a Persian woman was punished with instant
death by her husband or guardian. He who spoke to one of the numerous
inmates of the king’s harem, or touched their persons even in the most
accidental manner, or passed their chariots on the road, was killed
immediately. The modern laws are but little less severe.

A Persian woman, under the dominion of the kindest master, is treated
in much the same manner as a favorite animal. To vary her personal
graces for his pleasure is the sole end and aim of existence. As moral
or intellectual beings, it would be better for them to be among the
dead than the living. They are allowed to learn a little reading,
writing, and embroidery; but their reading is confined to the Koran,
and even that they generally read very imperfectly. Dancing and music
are little practised, except by a public class of women, usually
hired at festivals and entertainments, and of a character notoriously
profligate. These girls are more remarkable for agility than grace in
their motions.

The Persian women are kept continually shut up in the _harem_, which
they rarely leave from the cradle to the grave. They are visited only
by female relations, or female teachers, hired to furnish them their
scanty apparatus of knowledge. The mother instructs her daughter in
all the voluptuous coquetry by which she herself acquired precarious
ascendency over her absolute master; but all that is truly estimable in
female character is neglected, as it ever must be where nothing like
free and kind companionship exists between the sexes. A resident in
Persia declares that the women are ignorant, and inconceivably gross
in their ideas and conversation. Under such a system it could not be
otherwise.

The contempt in which women are held is singularly exemplified by a
Persian law, which requires the testimony of four of them in cases
where the declaration of two men would be deemed sufficient. While
talking with a person of rank, it would be considered grossly impolite
to make the most remote allusion to the female part of his family; even
if his beloved wife were on her death-bed, it would be deemed an almost
unpardonable insult to make any inquiries concerning her.

A large black eye, full of amorous softness, is considered the chief
requisite in Persian beauty. To increase this voluptuous languor of
expression, they make lines around the eyes with powder of antimony.
They take great pains to make their eyebrows meet; and if this charm
be denied, they paint them, so as to produce the effect. They not only
dye their hair and eyebrows, but also stain the face and neck with a
variety of figures of birds, beasts, and flowers, the sun, moon, and
stars. A large proportion of the noble families are descended from
Georgian and Circassian mothers, and consequently have fair complexions.

When a Persian father has selected a family with which he wishes to
have his son connected, he sends an elderly female to ascertain the
girl’s personal endowments, and the probable consent of her parents
or guardians. If the report prove favorable, the bridegroom sends
messengers to explain his merits, and make a formal offer of marriage.
The heads of the family meet to make all arrangements concerning
presents, ornaments, dowry, &c.; and the papers are sealed and
witnessed before magistrates.

On the morning of the wedding, the bridegroom sends a train of mules
laden with presents to the bride, preceded by music, and followed by
numerous servants, bearing costly viands on silver trays, to be spread
before the inmates of her father’s house. The day is spent in mirth
and feasting. Toward evening, the bride veiled, in scarlet or crimson
silk, is mounted on a superbly caparisoned mule, preceded by music, and
followed by a long train of relatives and friends to the house of her
destined husband, who rides forth with a similar procession to meet
her. The female attendants conduct her to the apartments prepared for
her, and she is from that moment a lawful wife. The bridegroom prepares
a sumptuous feast for his friends and relatives, who generally keep up
the festivities for three days.

The jointure settled upon a wife varies according to the wealth of the
husband. If he is in middling circumstances, he merely bestows two
dresses, a ring, and a mirror; but he is likewise expected to supply
all the requisite furniture.

It is deemed an irretrievable disgrace for a bride to be sent back
after she has left her father’s house. Sometimes the bridegroom
promises a jointure beyond his means; and in these cases, curious
scenes sometimes take place. He shuts the door against the cavalcade,
and declares the girl shall not enter his dwelling, unless the jointure
be reduced. Under these circumstances he is generally able to make his
own terms.

The harems of grandees are the most magnificent portion of their
palaces. In the king’s seraglio the same offices and places exist
as at court; but the chief equerry, the captain of the gate, the
captain of the guards, &c., are all of them women. Women likewise
read public prayers, and perform the rites of the Mohammedan religion
within the inclosures of the harem. Women practise medicine, and
bury the dead. A Persian harem is in fact a miniature city, with its
mosques, cemeteries, bazaars, &c. The inhabitants are divided into
four classes. The princesses of the blood are called _begum_; such of
the king’s women as have brought him children are called _kanoom_;
inferior women are called _katoon_; and those kept for the purpose of
waiting upon them are termed slaves. Each female has an apartment to
herself, or lodges with some aged women, and cannot go into the other
rooms, without express permission. The harem is watched by three sorts
of guards, over all of whom is placed a governor, or superintendent.
White eunuchs guard the outside, and are never permitted to enter the
interior; black eunuchs dwell round the second inner inclosure; and
within are stationed elderly women to watch day and night by turns. It
is indispensably requisite that the governor of the seraglio should be
very old, and exceedingly ugly. The inmates are sometimes allowed to
walk in the garden, after it has been well searched, and all persons
ordered to retire.

When it is necessary to remove the king’s women from one dwelling
to another, public notice is given five or six hours beforehand of
the road they are to pursue. All the inhabitants of the villages
through which they are to pass must forthwith quit their habitation.
A horseman rides before the cavalcade, calling with a loud voice,
Prohibition! Prohibition! The ladies sometimes ride astride on
horseback, closely veiled; but the wealthy generally travel in
palanquins, or cages of wicker-work, covered with cloth, and supported
by mules or camels. No excuse avails if any male, over seven years of
age, is caught in any place where he could so much as see the camels
that carry these women; even if a traveller were to stumble in his
hurry to get out of the way, the guards would beat him almost to death.

The first wife generally has a rank above her numerous rivals,
particularly if she be the mother of children; but this depends
entirely on the caprice of the master. Misdemeanors are punished
according to the discretion of the husband. When divorces take place,
the dowry originally given to the wife is set aside for her support.
The Persians have a superstition that the spilling of a woman’s blood
brings ill luck; for this reason, when the inmates of the harem are
discovered in any love-intrigue they are generally muffled up in their
long veils, and thrown from the top of a high tower.

Interest compels these women to practise all manner of coquettish arts.
The more capricious and presuming they are, the more likely are they
to receive attention; if gentle and reserved, they would be overlooked
in the crowd. The favorite always makes despotic use of her transient
power. On all occasions, she causes the pleasure of her presence to
be purchased with long delay and impatience; and when she visits her
female relatives, she makes it a point not to return till her husband
has sent many times for her. The Persians are generally scrupulously
neat in their persons and apparel.

The baths are a great place of amusement for ladies. Here they pass
hours and hours, listening to stories of fairies and genii, eating
sweetmeats, sharing each other’s pipes, and painting their persons. The
Jewesses are the oracles of the seraglio. From them the young beauties
purchase all manner of cosmetics, charms, amulets, love-potions, &c.

The endearing duties of a mother become a source of fear and sorrow
within the walls of the royal harem; for, in order to prevent quarrels
about the succession to the throne, it is customary to put large
numbers of children to death, or to deprive them of their eyes. The
queen-mother herself superintends these executions, to which she
becomes hardened by custom. The Persian mothers possess the only shadow
of power which women are allowed to have. They regulate the education
and settlement of their children, and it is said a marriage is not
concluded, even with the father’s consent, if they oppose it.

Sometimes when one of the king’s women offends him, or his mother, she
is married to some menial of the palace, which is considered a very
disgraceful punishment. But fortunate is her lot, who is transferred
from the royal harem to some favorite grandee. She receives the title
of a lawful wife, and is treated like a princess. Notwithstanding the
painful sacrifices and perpetual fear belonging to those who form the
king’s household, parents are extremely anxious to obtain the splendid
bondage for a daughter; for if she happens to be a favorite, the
greatest honors and emoluments are heaped on her relations.

Women of the middling class are more occupied than the wives of
grandees, and therefore unavoidably have more freedom. They spin, sew,
embroider, superintend the house, keep account of expenses, pay the
servant’s wages, and see that proper care is taken of the horses. Sir
Robert Porter, speaking of this class of Persian females, says, “They
do all the laborious part of the household establishment; each having
her own especial department, such as baking the bread, cooking the
meat, drawing the water, &c. Though the latest espoused is usually
spared in these labors, and the best dressed, still the whole party
seem to remain in good humor. When their lord shows himself among
them, it is like a master coming into a herd of favorite animals.
They all rush forward, frisking about him, pleased with a caress, or
frisking still if they meet with a pat instead. The four wives of my
worthy host retire at sunset, and each taking her infant and cradle
to the roof of her division of the house, not forgetting the skin of
water she has brought from the well, deposits her babe in safety, and
suspends the water-case near her, on a tripod of sticks, in order that
the evaporation may cool it for next day’s use. Our communicative host
told me that to preserve amity among these women, he was accustomed,
like all husbands who valued peace, to divide his time and attention
equally and alternately among them. Indeed the law of Mohammed, though
it allows four wives, expressly stipulates that the first married shall
experience no diminution of wardrobe, or accustomed privileges, in
consequence of the introduction of a new bride into the family.

When women of the common classes leave their houses they scrupulously
conceal their faces with a veil woven like a fine net, or a cloak with
two holes just big enough for their eyes; but the neck is often less
carefully covered than the face. Like all oriental women, they are very
fond of perfumes and ornaments. Their clothing is usually chosen and
purchased for them, as we do for little children.

On the death of a husband, they lay aside all rich and showy apparel,
and assume the garb of mourning, which among the Persians is pale
brown. For months and months they pay daily visits to the grave,
watering it with tears, rending their garments, and tearing their hair.
The law allows widows to marry again, but they seldom take a second
husband. In many cases, the anniversary of the birthday of the deceased
is for years kept as a solemn festival by his family and friends.

Several years ago, a beautiful Circassian accompanied the Persian
ambassador to London, where she excited great attention, and was
treated with distinguished kindness. Sir Robert Porter met her when she
was returning to Persia, mounted on a miserable post-horse. He says,
“The poor creature, perceiving that I was a European, rode forward to
address me; but in a moment the rough fellow who was her conductor
laid his whip over her shoulders, with so terrible an admonition into
the bargain, that, closing both her lips and her veil, she travelled
on, doubtless with heavy recollections. To interfere in behalf of a
woman so situated would cast a sort of contamination on her, and only
redouble her stripes.”

Women whose husbands are not rich enough to furnish palanquins, ride
astride a horse, muffled in a great sheet, which makes them look like a
bag of flour placed upright. Sometimes they are stuffed into panniers
slung across a mule or a camel, like poultry on the way to market. If
there be but one traveller, some heavy article is put into the opposite
basket as a balance.

When the ambassador Meerza Abul Hassan was in England, nothing excited
his surprise so much as the fact that women sometimes undertook
voyages. “Is it possible!” he exclaimed: “if I were to tell our
Persian women that there were English women in ships, they would never
believe me. They consider it a great undertaking to go from one town
to another; but your women go from one end of the world to the other,
and think nothing of it. If it were even known to my family that I was
now in a ship, on the high seas, there would be nothing but wailing and
lamentation from morning till night.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The architectural remains and ancient literature of Hindostan give a
high idea of their knowledge and refinement in remote ages. According
to their old poets, women were then regarded with a kind of chivalrous
gallantry, and enjoyed a degree of personal freedom, to which modern
Asiatic women are entire strangers: Sacontalu, the adopted daughter of
a holy Bramin, is the heroine of an interesting old drama, in which she
is mentioned as receiving strangers with the most graceful hospitality;
and when Dusmantha was absent from his capital, his mother governed in
his stead. Women were then admitted as witnesses in courts of justice,
and where the accused was a female, their evidence was even preferred.

Malabar boasts of her seven sages, and four of them were women. The
celebrated Avyar, one of the most ancient of these sages, probably
lived more than a thousand years ago. Her origin and birth are involved
in poetic fable; but her works are still extant, and held in much
estimation. They principally consist of short moral sentences, like
the following: “Speak not of God but with reverence.” “The sweetest
bread is that earned by labor.” “The genuine object of science is to
distinguish good from evil.” “Let thy books be thy best friends.”
“Modesty is the fairest ornament of a woman.” “There is no virtue
without religion.”

The Mohammedan creed, which everywhere produces a miserable effect
on the destiny of women, has considerably changed their condition in
Hindostan. The higher classes among the Hindoos, without adopting the
religion of the Mussulmans, copied their jealous precautions with
regard to females.

Wives are numerous, according to the wealth and character of their
owners. A petty Hindoo chief has been known to have several hundred
female slaves shut up in his zananah.[4] Under these unnatural
circumstances, we cannot wonder at the character of women given by
one of their pundits, as the Braminical expositors of law are called:
he says, “Women are characterized, first, by an inordinate love of
jewels, fine clothes, handsome furniture, and dainty food; second, by
unbounded profligacy; third, by violent anger and deep resentment, no
one knowing the sentiments that lie concealed in their hearts; fourth,
another person’s good appears evil in their eyes.” This is but one
among many instances wherein men have reproached the objects of their
tyranny with the very degradation and vices which their own contempt
and oppression have produced. How can it be wondered at that women,
with all the feelings and faculties of human nature, and unnaturally
deprived of objects for their passions, affections, or thoughts, should
seek excitement in petty stratagem and restless intrigue?

No Hindoo woman is allowed to give evidence in courts of justice. The
Bramins have power to put their wives to death for unfaithfulness;
but it is said that milder punishments are more usually inflicted.
Sometimes reconciliation takes place, and the event is celebrated by a
feast, to which the neighboring Bramins are invited, and the culprit
waits upon them at table.

This crime in Hindoo women is generally punished by expulsion from
their caste, a heavy fine, and the bastinado. It is considered a still
more disgraceful penalty to have the hair cut off. This is rarely
inflicted, except upon very abandoned females, who are afterward
plastered with filth, and led about on a donkey, accompanied with the
sound of tamtams.

Instances of extreme injustice sometimes occur, as must always be the
case where human beings are invested with arbitrary power.

One of the rajahs of Hindostan had a beautiful wife, whom he loved
better than all the rest of his women. A young man, who was originally
his barber, gained his confidence to such a degree, that nothing
could be done but through his interest. The rajah, having accepted an
invitation to an annual festival held at a great distance, trusted
every thing to the integrity of this prime minister. Before his master
had been gone a week, the villain dared to make love to his favorite
wife. She treated him with indignation and scorn, and threatened, if
he continued to repeat professions of his love, that she would expose
his baseness. He knew the rajah had a most fiery and impetuous temper,
and he at once resolved how to escape danger, and to be revenged upon
his virtuous victim. He sought an interview with his master the very
first moment he returned, and by a tissue of plausible falsehoods, made
him believe that his favorite wife was a faithless creature, entirely
unworthy of his confidence. The rajah, in a fit of blind fury, flew
into the zananah, and without speaking a word, murdered the beautiful
object of his recent attachment.

The circumstance was soon forgotten; for such murders were common, and
punishable by no laws. Even the nearest relatives of the deceased did
not ask the reason of such violence.

Thus precarious must all attachments be where moral and intellectual
sympathy have no share in the union.

After a considerable time had elapsed, one of the rajah’s wives, on her
death-bed, said she had something important to disclose to her husband;
the guilty favorite immediately imagined that his murdered victim had
made her a confident of his infamous designs, and he fled with all
possible precipitation. His fears proved true; the dying wife disclosed
the whole history of his treachery. The rajah tore his hair, and ran
round the palace like a madman. Horsemen were despatched in every
direction, but the wicked minister escaped. The agonized prince did all
he could--he raised a splendid temple to the memory of his murdered
wife. Within the temple is her image, the eyes of which are costly
diamonds. The unfortunate rajah at last went mad. He would look at his
hands, and wash them a hundred times a day; but he could not cleanse
the blood from his memory.

The Hindoo women frequently follow their husbands to battle, and perish
by their side. Rather than fall into the power of conquering enemies,
they often commit suicide, or entreat their husbands to kill them.

Females are engaged in almost every variety of occupation, according
to the caste of their husbands. They cultivate the land, make baskets
and mats, bring water in jars, carry manure and various other articles
to market in baskets on their heads, cook food, tend children, weave
cloth, reel skeins of thread, and wind cocoons. A single cocoon is
divided into twenty degrees of fineness; and these silk-winders have
such an exquisite sense of touch, that when the thread is running
swiftly through their fingers, they break it off exactly as the
assortments change. Cashmere shawls are sometimes woven in a manner
so delicate, that they can be drawn through a wedding ring; and they
manufacture muslin so transparent, that when laid on the grass it does
not at all intercept the color.

It has been said that there is no country in the world where so many
people live in idleness. This is no doubt in a great measure to be
ascribed to the enervating influence of their brilliant climate,
the abundance produced by a luxuriant soil, and the slight shelter
or clothing required, where the air is so uniformly mild, and the
sky serene. All travellers agree that the scenery of Hindostan is
beautiful, almost beyond imagination. Magnificent temples and tombs
indicate the grandeur of former times, while the gorgeous edifices of
more recent periods denote the wealth, if not the classic taste of her
princes; innumerable rivers fertilize and adorn the land, while the
air is perfumed with the lavish abundance of blossoms and fruit. The
inhabitants love to repose in the cool shadow of their broad-leaved
foliage; and the women are said to be so languidly indolent, that they
will hardly stretch forth their arms to save their children from being
trodden to death. One of their favorite authors says: “It is better to
sit still than to walk; better to sleep than to be awake; and death is
the best of all.”

In pictures of Hindoo women of the higher classes, I have always
observed a dangling and listless position of the arms and fingers,
which indicates all the writer has expressed. If any thing affects them
disagreeably, they are apt to signify it by lolling out their tongues.

When a father dies, the eldest son supplies his place, in protecting
and providing for his mother and younger members of the family. The
widow can only claim an allowance necessary for her support; but filial
piety is so highly reverenced by the Hindoos, that children often stint
themselves that their parents need not suffer. The greatest insult that
can be offered a Hindoo is to speak contemptuously of his mother.

The features of the Hindoos differ little from those of Europeans;
but their complexion is of a deep mahogany hue. A very perceptible
difference of physiognomy characterizes the various castes. Those who
do not labor are less vigorous than Europeans, but more elegantly
shaped. The women are said to be extremely beautiful, with delicate,
regular features, and remarkably fine dark eyes; but they lose their
beauty at an early age. They are generally distinguished by a childish
simplicity and modest gracefulness, which is very attractive. If the
husband is dissatisfied with his wife, he parts from her and seeks
another; and the wife can do the same with regard to her husband.
Some reasons are required to be given, but where both parties agree
in wishing for divorce it is very easily obtained. Sometimes when a
man desires a separation he calls his wife mother, and after that it
is considered indelicate to live with her. Sometimes an occasional
visiter addresses the females of the house in this way, as a pledge of
his purity. The poor seldom have more than one wife; and if she has
children they rarely part from her as long as they live. The women are
generally faithful and submissive to their husbands, and very fond of
their families. Even the poorest of them esteem it a great misfortune
to be childless. They regard it, as the Jews did of old, as a peculiar
visitation of God, and spare neither prayers, alms, offerings, nor
penances, to avert this calamity. They are often seen performing long
journeys, with two or three little children, whom they lead by the hand
or carry on their backs.

Women, even of the higher classes, are forbidden to read or write;
because the Hindoos think these acquirements would inevitably spoil
them for domestic life, and assuredly bring some great misfortune upon
them. Many stories are circulated concerning the dreadful accidents
that have happened to women, who could read and write. Poetry, music,
and dancing, are cultivated only by a class of women, openly and
avowedly licentious. The wives of rajahs, and the numerous favorites of
the Mohammedan grandees, do indeed divert their lords with dancing in
the interior of the zananah, but it would be deemed highly disgraceful
to indulge in this amusement before strangers. Nothing shocks an East
Indian more than the European custom of ladies and gentlemen dancing
with each other; they cannot believe that it does not indicate great
corruption of manners.

From the remotest antiquity, dancing has been associated with religion
in India. The _devedassees_ are young girls devoted to the service
of the temple almost from their infancy; and this is considered so
great an honor, that even the rajahs are anxious to obtain it for
their daughters. They must be well shaped, of pleasing features, of
good constitutions, and of very tender age; the parents are likewise
required to renounce all further claim to the child. The _devedassees_,
after bathing the novitiate in the tank belonging to the temple, dress
her in new clothes and adorn her with jewels; the high priest puts into
her hand an image of the deity, to whose service she devotes herself
with a solemn vow; the lobes of her ears are then bored, and the seal
of the temple imprinted on her with red-hot iron. The great pagoda of
Juggernaut contains five or six hundred of these girls. The Bramins
teach them to read, write, sing, and dance. They must likewise be
versed in the history of their gods; but they are forbidden to read
the _vedas_.[5] They take care of the temples, light the lamps, and
sing and dance before the statue of the god, on solemn festivals. Some
say the devedasses are entirely subservient to the pleasures of the
Bramins, who are exceedingly jealous of them; others say they are at
liberty to choose any lovers, in or out of the temple, provided they
be of the higher castes. The tips of their nails are stained red. The
long braided hair, the neck, the naked arms, and the feet are covered
with jewels; rings on the hand, rings on the feet, rings in the ears,
and sometimes rings in the side of the nose; literally, according to
the old nursery story, “with rings on her fingers and bells on her
toes.” The silver chains and bells with which they decorate the ankles
and feet, make a monotonous but agreeable sound, as they dance, that
mingles pleasantly with the small drums, tambourines, and silver
cymbals, to which they keep time. In their hands they hold wooden
castanets, which they strike in cadence. At the end of each dance they
turn toward the idol, with their hands clasped before their faces. All
make precisely the same movements and gestures at the same moment. When
they become old, or the Bramins, for any other reason, wish to have
them leave, they are dismissed from the pagoda. The temple where they
serve furnishes them with food, clothing, and pay; but when they leave,
they are obliged to relinquish all articles of ornament. They are ever
after received in society with peculiar respect, a degree of sanctity
is attached to their character, and it is considered an honor to marry
them. If turned out of the temple in their old age, they are liable to
be in destitute circumstances, unless they have a handsome daughter to
succeed them; if so, they may safely rely upon filial kindness.

There is another class of Hindoo dancers, called _canceni_, or
_bayaderes_. They are avowedly courtesans; but not disgraced by
assuming that character, as women are in Christian countries. They
receive the same education as the _devedassees_, or sacred dancers; but
they are not like them confined to the service of the temples. Wealthy
men hire them at entertainments, and some grandees keep a whole company
constantly in their service. They too are load with jewels, bracelets,
armlets, carcanets, coronals, rings, ear-rings, nose-rings, bells, and
chains. The dress of a distinguished dancer often costs from fifteen to
twenty thousand rupees. They surround their eyes with a black circle,
made with the head of a pin dipped in powder of antimony. Those who are
accustomed to it think it increases beauty of expression.

To preserve the comeliness of their forms, they cover the bosom with
hollow cases of wood, linked together, and buckled at the back. These
cases are made so very thin and pliable, that they move freely with the
slightest motion of the body; they are plated with gold or silver, and
sometimes set with gems. There is nothing loud or bold in the manners
of these degraded women. They are all softness, gentleness, and
coquetry; but their dances, and the songs that accompany them, in which
the Orientals take unbounded delight, are voluptuous beyond description.

There is another genuine Hindoo dance, called _nautch_, that differs
in all respects from the dances performed by the _devedassees_, or
the _canceni_. “It is executed by three women, who display in their
steps and attitude a degree of seductive gracefulness astonishing to
Europeans.” These dancers are called _ramdjenies_. Their dress is
embroidered with gold and silver. They wear trowsers of very rich
stuff, with a circle of bells around the ankles. Their lower garment is
very ample, and becomes inflated like a balloon, when they turn swiftly.

One of the most remarkable features of Hindostan, is the division of
society into distinct _castes_. Nearly a hundred different castes
exist, the distinctions of which the Bramins themselves are puzzled to
define.

The parias, who are considered the scum of all the castes, have a most
deplorable lot. These absurd regulations subject the masters of houses
to great expense, as the meanest domestic absolutely refuses to perform
any office but the one allotted to his or her caste.

A religious and civil law forbids any mixture of blood between the
different castes. It is singular that a man is not degraded from his
caste for being vicious, or for believing or disbelieving certain
articles of religion; but he _is_ degraded for intermarrying with an
inferior caste, forming a friendship with any such, or partaking food
with them. Customs that have some degree of similarity are hereditary
among the descendants of the Jewish nation, and in some parts of the
Chinese empire; but the nearest parallel to the Hindoo distinction
of castes exists between the white and colored population of the
United States of America. There is indeed some difference. The wealthy
American, if starving, would gladly partake food with the mulatto,
whose companionship would disgrace him under other circumstances; but
the high caste Bramin would die rather than receive sustenance from a
paria.

“A Bramin, being oppressed with thirst as he journeyed along, met a
woman of low condition carrying a vessel of water on her head. He asked
her for some to drink; but, that he might not receive water from an
impure hand, he formed a little channel on the ground; the woman poured
the water in at one end, while the Bramin drank at the other. One of
his own caste, who happened to be passing at the time, accused him
before the council of the Bramins; the affair was investigated, and he
narrowly escaped the sentence of exclusion from his caste.”

It is said that all distinctions cease in the temple of Juggernaut, on
the occasion of a yearly festival; in commemoration of the primitive
equality of mankind, the Bramin and the paria then eat together,
without any disastrous consequences.

It is rare to find an unmarried female in India, except those who have
been betrothed in infancy, and lost their partners before the period
of what they call “the second marriage.” These girls can never marry
without losing caste; but as the affections cannot be controlled by
custom, these unfortunate beings often forfeit their characters by
imprudence. Suicides on this account were so common, that an officer
of the British government, in order to prevent them in his district,
commanded that all such corpses should be exposed to the public gaze.
The law proved so effectual, that there was never any necessity for
enforcing it.

Marriages between little girls and very old men are common in India.
The Hindoo girls usually marry between the ages of seven and nine
years, and the boys between twelve and fourteen. The wife must not only
be of the same caste with her husband, but also of the same family.
The Hindoo has a right to marry the daughter of his father, or of his
mother’s brother. Parents cannot give a denial when their daughter is
demanded, because brothers and sisters only, of the same caste, are
forbidden to marry; but under that name the law includes the children
of the father’s brothers, and of the mother’s sisters.

The ceremonies vary among different castes, and in different districts.
The wealthy give very expensive entertainments, the cost of which is
defrayed by the husband’s father. The practice likewise varies in
regard to dowry. In the superior castes, the wife generally brings her
husband a portion; but among the sooders, the bridegroom gives a sum of
money to the bride’s father. One kind of the ancient Hindoo marriages
required no ceremony but the mutual consent of the parties. Without
witnesses, they exchanged necklaces or wreaths of flowers, the girl
saying, “I am thy wife;” and the bridegroom replying, “It is true.” In
the inferior castes the marriage ceremony is still very simple, but it
is not considered legal unless performed in the presence of the chief
of the tribe.

A singular custom has been said to prevail in a town of the Carnatic.
When a young couple are conducted to the temple, the bride offers her
hand to the priest, who cuts off the third and little finger at the
second joint. In ancient times both parties sacrificed a joint of the
finger; but as this sometimes made it difficult for the husband to
follow his profession, the Bramins decided that the woman should make a
double sacrifice, and lose two fingers instead of one. A woman of that
caste considers it a disgrace to have all her fingers.

Before any match is concluded, great pains is taken to ascertain
whether the aspect of the stars predicts a fortunate or unfortunate
union. Marriages are solemnized only in February, May, June, October,
and the beginning of November.

When a Hindoo has fixed his mind upon what he considers a suitable
match for his son, he sends a stranger to sound the girl’s father, in
order to save himself the shame of an open rejection. If the suggestion
be favorably received, he goes and makes a formal proposition. He must
be accompanied by some married woman, by several relations, and a
Bramin skilled to explain omens. To meet a dealer in oil, a dog that
shakes his ears, a crow flying over their heads, and a hundred other
such things, are considered signs so unlucky, as to make it necessary
to defer the visit. He generally carries the _pariam_, a sum of money
from four to six guineas, as the price of the girl. Such marriages
are said to be by _pariam_. The bride’s father returns the visit with
great ceremony and pomp, carrying presents to the bridegroom. After
these formalities, the girl is considered as sold; but the match may
be broken off, and the _pariam_ returned, if it be determined by a
general meeting of the relatives, and sometimes of the whole caste,
that the bride’s father has any justifiable reason for so doing. To
avoid the expense of an entertainment which it is customary to give,
the _pariam_ is frequently paid on the wedding day; but some pay it
a year beforehand. The bridegroom presents the bride with a piece of
silk, which she wears on the wedding day. This garment is always silk,
if the parties be ever so poor. If the _pariam_ be in money, it is tied
up in one corner of this robe; if it be a jewel, it is laid upon it.

There is another kind of marriage where the _pariam_ is dispensed with.
This is called _cannigadanam_, which signifies _the gift of a maiden_.

When the day is fixed for the wedding, the bride’s father builds a
bower of lattice-work in the courtyard of his house. The erection of
this _pendal_, or marriage bower, is considered a publication of the
bans, and friends and relations immediately pay a ceremonious visit.
The female friends, walking under a canopy, bring presents of betel to
the young couple. In the midst of the court is set up a stone image of
Polear, god of marriage. The Bramins make offerings of cocoas, bananas,
and betel, praying that the god would be propitious to the marriage. As
soon as the _pendal_ is finished, the image is removed. The bridegroom,
richly dressed, and accompanied by his friends in festal attire, is
conducted to the house of the bride. Here a particular ceremony is
performed, called _taking away the looks_; for the Hindoos believe the
most deplorable consequences would ensue, if any person looked on the
young man with envious, or malicious eyes. To avert this disaster, they
prepare a basin of water colored red, which they turn round three times
before the face of the bridegroom, and then throw it into the street;
sometimes they tear a strip of cloth before him, and throw the pieces
different ways; and sometimes they fasten certain mystic rings on the
heads of the couple. The bridegroom and bride, splendidly dressed, are
carried about for several days in palanquins, accompanied by a long
train of relations and friends, some riding on horses, and some on
elephants, preceded by musicians and dancing girls. These processions
are generally in the evening, attended by illuminations and fireworks.
While these ceremonies continue, the dancing girls meet in the _pendal_
morning and evening, and rub the young couple with _naleng_, the small
green seed of a plant sacred to marriage. While the assembled guests
are dining, the bride and bridegroom eat together from the same plate.
This is the only time during her whole life that a Hindoo wife is
allowed to eat with her husband. On the wedding day, the bride and
bridegroom sit beside each other, at one end of the _pendal_, which
is lighted with a great number of lamps. The Bramins, on a raised
platform, surrounded with jars of water, offer prayers to their gods.
They then kindle the sacrificial fire, with various kinds of sacred
wood, and repeat prayers and invocations, while they throw into the
flames incense, sandal-wood, oil, butter, rice, and other things. When
the prayers are ended, the father of the bride puts her hand within
that of the bridegroom, calls the god of fire to witness his words, and
then repeats after the Bramin: “I, ----, the son of ---- and grandson
of ----, give my daughter to thee, son of ---- and grandson of ----.”

The Bramin breaks a cocoa-nut in two, blesses the _tali_, which all
present are required to touch, and gives it to the bridegroom, who
hangs it round the neck of the bride. The _tali_ is a golden ornament
for the neck, made in various forms, and is worn by all married women,
in the same manner as the wedding-ring with us. The young couple walk
three times round the fire, and the bridegroom swears in presence of
the Bramin that he will take care of his wife. He then casts into the
fire boiled rice and butter, and she casts in parched rice. The priest
repeats prayers while he mixes a little saffron with raw rice. This he
first sprinkles over the shoulders of the husband, and then of the
wife; all who are present rise and perform the same ceremony, by way
of benediction. In the marriages of princes, pearls are sometimes used
instead of rice. The rest of the day is spent in diversions, and the
last public procession takes place in the evening.

Next day, they hasten to pull down the _pendal_; because it would be
considered a very bad omen if it should happen to take fire. The bride
is often so very young that she remains at her father’s house for a
considerable time after the wedding. When this is the case, she is
afterward given to her husband with similar ceremonies and festivities,
called “the second, or little, marriage.” The Hindoo brides wear a
hymeneal crown, and the color of the nuptial robe is golden yellow.

Until a wife becomes a mother, she is obliged to obey the commands of
her mother-in-law, and sees her husband by stealth. The birth of a
child is attended with many religious ceremonies. The husband, assisted
by Bramins, sprinkles the house with holy water, and all the inmates
anoint themselves with oil, and wash themselves. The mother is bathed,
and drinks a certain beverage prescribed for such occasions. On the
tenth day, friends and relations assemble to give a name to the infant;
but the Bramin first consults the planets, endeavors by prayer to avert
any evil influence, and ties a _zinar_, or amulet, about the neck of
the child. Presents are then made to the priests, and the ceremony is
concluded with a feast and rejoicings.

The Hindoo women make no use of a cradle. The babe, unshackled by any
clothing or bandages, is laid on a large piece of cloth stretched
on pieces of wood, something like a small quilting frame. This is
suspended by strong cords from the ceiling, and two women swing it, by
pushing it from one to the other.

When the child has attained the age of six months, it is fed for the
first time with rice prepared with milk and sugar. On this occasion a
feast is made and all the relations invited.

If a child dies, the mother sits at the door, or by the river’s side,
and utters loud lamentations, like the following: “Ah, my Huree-das,
where has he gone? Who has taken my golden image? I never saw a face
like unto his! He played round me like a golden top! Take me with thee!”

If any female neighbor tries to console her, she answers: “Ah, mother,
the heart takes no advice. Was this a child to be forgotten? He had
a forehead like a king! Since it was born the master never staid in
the house; he was always walking about with the child in his arms! I
nourished and reared him--where is he gone?”

While mourning in this way, they sometimes beat their foreheads, tear
their hair, and roll about, as if in agony. Hindoo wives never call
their husbands by name, but always say, “the master.”

Very singular customs prevail among the people called Garos. If a man’s
wife prove unfaithful, he cannot obtain divorce, unless he chooses to
give her all the property and children. A woman, on the contrary,
may part from her husband when she pleases, and by marrying another
person, convey to him the whole property of her former husband. The
children go with her, but their rank is decided by that of the father.
If the wife has a lover, the husband may indeed kill him, but he incurs
the resentment of all the man’s relations, and the woman would be
very likely to revenge herself by transferring the property to a new
husband. Divorces are, however, said to be rare. When a chief dies, his
heir is any one of his sister’s sons, whom his widow may choose as a
successor. If the youth is married, he immediately separates from his
wife, who takes all his private fortune and his children; he marries
the widow, and receives the wealth and rank of his predecessor. When
the old lady dies, he is at liberty to choose a young wife, who, if
she survive him, will, in her turn, select one of his sister’s sons.
The wife of a chief, when she divorces her husband, is obliged to
choose one from the same noble family. The red turban and bell-metal
bracelets, which are bestowed with great ceremony on the new chieftain,
do not always make him contented with a partner so much older than
himself. One, who was almost a boy, complained to an Englishman, with
great simplicity, that he had married a toothless old woman, while his
poor cousin had a pretty young wife, with whom he could play all the
day long.

The Bramins, by a peculiar custom, often take wives against their own
will. If a father has a marriageable daughter, on whom he wishes to see
conferred the privileges belonging to a Bramin’s wife, he invites the
Bramin to his house, and introduces the girl to him; she respectfully
offers her hand to the unsuspecting visiter, and the moment he takes
it, her father begins to repeat the genealogy of his family. This
constitutes a legal marriage, and there is no way of escape from it.

Some writers have mentioned a tribe in the Carnatic, whose women are
not allowed to be seen by any man, not even their husbands, who visit
them only in the dark. Shut up in secluded apartments with their female
companions, they employ themselves in weaving mats and baskets, and
similar occupations. Even their sons are taken from them at three or
four years old, and never suffered to look on them again. Women of
their own tribe nurse them when they are ill, and when dead, their
husbands sew them up in a sack, before they are carried to the funeral
pile. This singular tribe was never large, and is now said to be nearly
extinct.

The clothing of the Hindoos is seldom washed; for neatness is not their
characteristic. The fashion of their garments is modest; the arms and
upper part of the neck only being uncovered. Women of all castes,
throughout India, load themselves with jewels. Common bracelets are
made of vitrified earth, green, yellow, and black. Another kind are
made of glass, and esteemed beautiful in proportion to the closeness
with which they fit to the arm. Blood is often drawn, and the skin
rubbed off, in getting them over the hand; and as they are continually
breaking, the poor girls suffer not a little for their vanity. Gems,
gold, and rare shells, exquisitely manufactured, are worn in the utmost
profusion by those who can afford them. The loss of the precious metals
in India, by friction alone, is said to be immense. The fashion is of
ancient date, for the oldest statues of their gods and goddesses are
almost buried in jewels.

Females of the higher castes, married or unmarried, never go abroad
alone, and without being completely veiled. If by any accident their
faces happen to be uncovered, and they meet a European, they run, as
fast as they can, into the first Hindoo house that has an appearance
of respectability. In the interior of the country, a whole village of
women are put in consternation by the sight of a European; this is
probably in some measure owing to the insults of intoxicated soldiers.

The rajpoots, one of the military tribes of Hindostan, treat their
women with an unusual degree of respect. A rajpoot never forgives an
insult offered to his wife or daughter, and nothing but the death of
the culprit can atone for his offence. None but the grandees avail
themselves of the privilege to take several wives; and even they seldom
do it, except from political considerations. Their married women never
visit any but their nearest relatives; and any female would be very
much ashamed of being seen in public. The rajpoots, though exceedingly
kind husbands and sons, have one strangely unnatural custom; they put
to death new-born female infants when they have no prospect of an
advantageous settlement for them. The daughters which they bring up are
kept most rigidly secluded from society. Merely to have been seen by
any other man than their very nearest relation is considered pollution.
The rajpoots carry this feeling so far, that when they cannot escape
from a besieging enemy, they murder all their women, to prevent their
being seen by strangers.

The Mahrattas of Hindostan form a kind of military republic, and live
in a miserably uncleanly, half-barbarous manner. The women have very
little beauty, and have generally a bold look, different from any other
Hindoo females. The poor sling their children over their shoulders in
a bag, and march thus a whole day, without any apparent fatigue. They
accompany the army on horseback, with faces uncovered, and seated in
the same manner as the men. A circumstance related by Broughton, in
his Letters, gives us reason to think highly of the morals of this
rude tribe. A young girl served in Sindia’s army two or three years,
without being discovered. She gained the confidence of her superiors,
and the regard of her associates, by conduct remarkably regular and
exemplary. She always dressed her own dinner, and ate it by herself;
and she was never seen to wash in the presence of any person. The
secret which she took so much pains to conceal, was discovered by a
young comrade, who followed her when she went to bathe. As soon as it
was known that a woman had served so long and so faithfully in the
army, Sindia made her flattering offers of promotion in the corps to
which she belonged, and his wife proposed to receive her into her own
household; but Jooruor Singh, as the young soldier was named, refused
all patronage, and continued to serve for some months. She was about
twenty-two years of age, with a fair and interesting countenance,
though not handsome. She frankly answered questions concerning her
situation, alike without bashfulness or boldness. It was finally
discovered that the affectionate creature had encountered the fatigues
and perils of military life with the hope of raising money enough
to liberate a beloved brother imprisoned at Bopal. As soon as this
circumstance became known to Sindia, he discharged her from the army,
made her a liberal donation, and gave her a letter to the nabob of
Bopal, earnestly recommending her and her brother to his protection.

It is very much to the honor of all parties, that Jooruor Singh, from
the moment she was known to be a woman, received increased deference
and attention; not even the meanest soldier presumed to utter an
offensive word in her presence.

This furnishes a good commentary on the severe but often-evaded laws of
the harem. Perfect external freedom is always the greatest safeguard of
virtue.

The Nairs, on the coast of Malabar, have very extraordinary customs,
for the origin of which it is difficult to account. Their women are
beautiful and remarkably neat. They are usually married before they
are ten years of age; but it would be deemed exceedingly indecorous
for the husband to live with his wife, or even to visit her, except as
an acquaintance. She lives with her mother, and prides herself on the
number of her lovers, especially if they be Bramins or rajahs; but if
any of them were her inferiors, she would be immediately expelled from
her caste, which is the greatest misfortune that can befall a Hindoo.
Owing to these strange customs, a Nair has much more affection for his
sister’s children than for those of his wife, and no one is offended at
being asked who is his father. The husband is, of course, the lover of
some other married dame. If he offers the lady cloth for a dress, and
she accepts it, the matter is settled, until they see fit to change.
Sons inherit the fortune of the maternal grandfather. The heir apparent
to the throne of Travancore is not the son of the rajah’s wife, but of
his oldest sister, who is treated as queen.

The Nairs treat their mothers with the utmost respect, and have a
filial regard for maternal uncles and aunts; but they scarcely notice
their fathers, and have little affection for brothers and sisters. Yet
notwithstanding this allowed profligacy, these singular people are very
jealous of the honor of their women. An intrigue with a European, or
one of a different tribe, would be punished with death. The Bramins
indeed are allowed to be the lovers of wives and daughters of the other
superior castes; their proposals are deemed too great an honor to be
refused. The disgusting class called fakirs likewise obtain great
influence over the minds of women by their ostentatious sanctity. They
often carry beautiful girls to their temples, under the pretence that
the god has chosen them for wives; and this is considered an enviable
distinction. The women among the Nairs go with the upper part of the
person entirely uncovered; as is generally the case throughout Malabar,
and even in the southern parts of the peninsula. They have their ears
bored in childhood, and in order to enlarge the aperture, they put in
a rolled leaf of the cocoa tree, or suspend a piece of lead; afterward
they insert small round ivory cases. They wear the hair flowing loosely
behind, or hanging in several tresses curiously braided. It is never
cut off, except in seasons of mourning, or as a punishment.

The women in this part of Hindostan have a singular custom. When a
young girl is betrothed, when she is married, and when a son is born,
all the female relatives meet at her house, and make the event known to
the neighbors by a long, loud, monotonous howl, which one would suppose
was intended to express any thing but joy.

There is a caste in Hindostan, comprising all painters and gilders, in
which brothers marry their sisters, and uncles their nieces.

At funerals, hired female mourners tear their hair, beat themselves,
and utter dismal cries. The custom of widows burning themselves upon
the funeral pile of their husbands is not commanded as a religious duty
in any of their sacred writings; but enthusiastic devotees have been
led to sanction the cruel ceremony by the following text: “The woman
who dies with her husband shall enjoy life eternal with him in heaven.”

A woman who resolves upon this sacrifice, abstains from food as soon
as her husband is dead, and continually repeats the name of the god
he had worshipped. When the hour arrives, she adorns herself with
rich clothes and jewels, and goes to the funeral pile, attended by
her relations and friends, with the sound of musical instruments. The
Bramins give her drink in which opium is mixed, and sing songs in
praise of heroism. It is said that before the ceremony they try to
dissuade her from her project; but the resolution once taken is sacred.
One of them being warned of the pain she would endure, held her finger
in the fire for some time, and then burned incense on the palm of her
hand, to prove her contempt of suffering. Mr. Forbes mentions a female
whose husband had amply provided for her by will, and, contrary to
the usual custom of the Hindoos, had made her perfectly independent
of his family. “She persisted in her determination to accompany him
to a better world, and suffered not the tears and supplications of
an aged mother and three helpless infants to change her purpose. An
immense concourse of people of all ranks assembled, and a band of music
accompanied the Bramins, who superintended the ceremony. The bower
of death, enwreathed with sacred flowers, was erected over a pile of
sandal-wood and spices, on which lay the body of the deceased. After
various ceremonies, the music ceased, and the crowd in solemn silence
waited the arrival of the heroine. She was attended by her mother and
three lovely children, arrayed in rich attire, and wearing the hymeneal
crown. After a few religious ceremonies, the attendants took off her
jewels, and anointed her dishevelled hair with consecrated ghee, as
also the skirts of her yellow muslin robe. She then distributed her
ornaments among weeping friends, while two lisping infants clung around
her knees to dissuade her from the fatal purpose; the last pledge of
conjugal love was taken from her bosom by an aged parent in speechless
agony. Freed from these heart-piercing mourners, the lovely widow, with
an air of solemn majesty, received a lighted torch from the Bramins,
with which she walked seven times round the pyre. Stopping near the
entrance of the bower, for the last time she addressed the fire, and
worshipped the other deities prescribed; then setting fire to her hair
and the skirts of her robe, to render herself the only brand worthy of
illuminating the sacred pile, she threw away the torch, rushed into the
bower, and embracing her husband, thus communicated the flames to the
surrounding branches. The musicians immediately struck up the loudest
strains, to drown the cries of the victim, should her courage have
forsaken her; but several of the spectators declared that the serenity
of her countenance and the dignity of her behavior surpassed all the
sacrifices of a similar nature they had ever witnessed.”

Such an event is deemed very glorious to the family of the victim,
and that of her husband. They are proud of her in proportion to the
calmness and heroism with which she meets her fate. If the resolution
of the poor creatures fail them at the last moment, they bring
irretrievable disgrace on their connections. If they try to go back,
they are often put to death by relatives, or expelled from their caste,
and forever cut off from all intercourse with relations or friends. But
notwithstanding religious enthusiasm, and the prejudices of education,
they are not always resigned to their cruel fate.

In 1796, the widow of a Bramin determined to be burned with the body of
her husband. It was dark and rainy when the pile was lighted, and when
she began to be scorched by the flames, she crept away unperceived,
and hid herself in the brushwood. It was soon discovered, and they
dragged her forth. Her own son insisted that she should be thrown on
the pile again, or else hang herself. She pleaded hard for life, but
pleaded in vain. The son said he should be expelled from his caste,
unless the sacrifice were completed, and that either he or she must
die. Finding her still unwilling to destroy herself, the son and his
companions bound her limbs and threw her on the funeral pile, where
she quickly perished. The bones are carefully collected in vases, and
thrown into some sacred river. The next day the Bramins sprinkle milk
and consecrated water over the place, and sometimes erect a chapel.

It not unfrequently happens that a number of wives are burned at once
with the dead body of their husband; and a willingness to make this
sacrifice is said to be still more a point of honor with mistresses
than with wives. When the chief Rao Lacka died, fifteen mistresses
perished with him, but not one of his wives offered to sacrifice
herself. A Koolin Bramin of Bagnuparu had more than a hundred wives,
twenty-two of whom were consumed with his corpse. The fire was kept
kindled for three days, waiting the arrival of the numerous victims.
Some of them were forty years old, and others no more than sixteen.
Nineteen of them had seldom even seen the husband with whom they
consented to perish.

It is said the widows of Bramins less frequently immolate themselves
than women of the other superior castes, because the Bramins often take
wives without any inclination for the union on either side.

In 1819, a girl of fifteen determined to become a suttee.[6] The
person to whom she had been betrothed died when she was six years old,
and, according to custom, she had ever after remained unmarried. No
entreaties could prevail on her to consent to live. She asked for a
fiddle which had belonged to her betrothed, and jumped into the flames.

Among the Mahrattas, and some other tribes, whose custom it is to bury
their dead, the sacrifice is made in a different manner. The widow
is escorted to the grave by a solemn procession; having listened to
the exhortations of the Bramins, and parted her jewels among friends,
she places upon her head a pot filled with rice, plantain, betel, and
water; then with clasped hands she bids farewell to the spectators,
and descends into the grave by means of a bamboo ladder; she seats
herself by the body of her husband, the ladder is drawn up, and the
music resounds, while the relatives throw in a quantity of earth to
suffocate the poor creature.

The Shaster, or Hindoo Bible, forbids a woman to see dancing, hear
music, wear jewels, blacken her eyebrows, eat dainty food, sit at a
window, or view herself in a mirror, during the absence of her husband;
and it allows him to divorce her if she has no sons, injures his
property, scolds him, quarrels with another, or presumes to eat before
he has finished his meal.

Truly, in no part of the world does the condition of women appear more
dreary than in Hindostan. The arbitrary power of a father disposes of
them in childhood; if the boy to whom they are betrothed dies before
the completion of the marriage, they are condemned forever after to
perpetual celibacy; under these restraints, if their affections become
interested and lead them into any imprudence, they are punished with
irretrievable disgrace, and in many districts with death; if married,
their husbands have despotic control over them; if unable to support
them, they can lend or sell them to a neighbor; and in the Hindoo
rage for gambling, wives and children are frequently staked and lost;
if they survive their husbands, they must pay implicit obedience to
the oldest son; if they have no sons, the nearest male relative holds
them in subjection; and if there happen to be no kinsmen, they must be
dependent on the chief of the tribe. Having spent life with scanty
opportunities to partake of its enjoyments, they become objects of
contempt if they refuse to depart from it, in compliance with a most
cruel custom.

The self-immolation of widows is of great antiquity. The natives have
a tradition that women many centuries ago frequently murdered their
husbands; and the Bramins, finding the severest punishments of no
avail, put an effectual check to it, by saying it was the will of
the gods, that widows should be burned on the funeral pile of their
husbands.

The English government have made great exertions to abolish this
abominable practice, and it is now prohibited by law in every part of
British India.

The Hindoo character is proverbial for patient mildness; yet their
religious superstitions continually lead them to the most ferocious
deeds. Fond as the women are of their children, they make a great merit
of throwing them to the sacred crocodiles, and not unfrequently cast
them from steep rocks, in fulfilment of some superstitious vow.

They themselves undergo the most frightful penances, and willingly
lie down to be devoured by crocodiles, or crushed beneath the car of
Juggernaut. Among the lighter penances, is that of conveying a great
quantity of water from the sacred Ganges to a temple at some distance.
Women of the higher castes, being unwilling to appear in the streets,
hire others to perform this expiatory duty for them.

The Rev. Dr. Buchanan, in his description of the sacrifices at the
temple of Juggernaut, says: “At the place of skulls, I beheld a poor
woman lying dead, or nearly dead, with her two children by her, looking
at the dogs and vultures which were near. The people passed by without
noticing the children. I asked them where was their home. They said
they had no home but where their mother was.”

This bigoted attachment to customs so horrid and unnatural, is
remarkable in a people who are so tolerant of the opinions of others.
It is a singular fact that the Hindoos reverence the objects held
sacred by other nations; hence their women and children are frequently
seen bringing offerings of fruit and flowers to the mosque of the
Mohammedan, and the chapel of the Catholic. They say, “Heaven is like a
palace with many doors, and every one may enter in his own way.”

The custom of murdering female infants, which formerly prevailed
throughout several districts in India, is so unnatural that it could
not be believed, if it were not proved beyond all possibility of
doubt. The horrid act was generally done by the mothers themselves,
either by administering opium as soon as a child was born, smothering
it, or neglecting the precautions necessary to preserve life. Now and
then a wealthy man saved one daughter, especially if he had no sons;
but the practice of infanticide was so general, that when the young
men wanted wives, they were obliged to seek them in such neighboring
tribes as their laws permitted them to marry. The marquis of Wellesley,
during his government in India, made great exertions to have this
abominable custom abolished; but the natives were very stubborn in
their prejudices. They urged the natural inferiority of females, the
great responsibility which attended their bringing up, and the expense
incident upon their marriages. The arguments of the English, aided by
the influence of certain solemn sentences from some of their sacred
books, did, however, at last persuade them to abolish the barbarous
practice. Colonel Walker was the British officer who, after much
difficulty, prevailed on the Jarejah tribe to relinquish the custom.
A year or two after, many of the Jarejah fathers and mothers brought
their infant daughters to his tent, and exhibited them with the utmost
pride and fondness. Grateful for the change produced in their habits,
the mothers placed their children in colonel Walker’s hands, called
them _his_ children, and begged him to protect those whom he had
preserved.

The gentle and inoffensive character of the Hindoos is not without
exceptions. Bands of robbers infest the more northern parts; and some
of them make use of a singular stratagem to decoy travellers. They send
out a beautiful woman, who with many tears complains of some misfortune
that has befallen her, and implores their protection. No sooner has the
unwary traveller taken her behind him on horseback, than she strangles
him with a noose, or stuns him with a blow on the head, until the
robbers come from their hiding-place, and complete his destruction. It
is generally supposed that these murderers came into India with the
Mohammedan conquerors.

The Hindoos are very fond of shows and amusements; but in these the
women, especially of the higher classes, have little share. The female
pastimes consist principally of bathing, dressing, chewing betel,
listening to story-tellers, and playing a species of draughts.

In March the Hindoos keep a great festival called _hohlee_; and it is
a singular coincidence that during one of these holydays it is common
to send people on absurd errands, in order to create a laugh at their
expense, just as we do on the first of April. They likewise divert
themselves with throwing about great quantities of earth used in
painting, and known by the name of India red. The sport is to cast it
into the eyes, mouth, and nose. Sometimes it is powdered with talc to
make it glitter, and then if it gets into the eyes it is very painful.
They likewise splash each other all over, with squirts filled with
orange-colored water, made of the flowers of the _dak_ tree. These
frolics usually take place under the front awning of wealthy houses,
or the terraces of the gardens, but sometimes within the buildings. A
rajah, surrounded by his numerous wives, has a fair chance to get his
full share of powdering and drenching.

The hohlee is observed by all classes throughout Hindostan, with the
most boisterous merriment. The utmost freedom is allowed to all ranks.
Young men and old parade about the streets, singing indecent songs.
Sometimes an individual dresses himself up in the most fantastic style,
to personify the _hohlee_, and is followed by crowds throwing red dust
and orange-colored water. This custom, which is said to be connected
with some religious tradition, is very similar to the observance of
the carnival in Catholic countries. The Hindoo ladies have their share
of the festivities; but no one is allowed to join their parties except
their husbands, or very young brothers.

The wives of jugglers follow the same profession as their husbands. It
is a common sight to see young women walking on their heads, with their
feet in the air, turning round like a wheel, or walking on their hands
and feet, with the body bent backward.

A recent traveller thus describes one of the tricks which he saw
performed: “A young and beautifully formed woman fixed on her head a
stiff strong fillet, to which were fastened, at equal distances, twenty
pieces of string, with a noose at the end of each. Under her arm she
carried a basket containing twenty eggs. She advanced near us, and
began to move rapidly round upon a spot not more than eighteen inches
in diameter, from which she never deviated for an instant, though her
rotation became so exceedingly rapid as to render it painful to look at
her. She absolutely spun round like a top. When her body had reached
its extreme point of acceleration, she quickly drew down one of the
strings, which had formed a horizontal circle round her, and put an egg
into the noose. She then jerked it back to its original position, and
continuing her gyrations with undiminished velocity, she secured all
the eggs in the nooses prepared for them, until they were all flying
around her head in one unbroken circular line. After this she continued
her motions with undiminished velocity for at least five minutes, then
seized the eggs one by one, and replaced them in the basket. This being
done, she stopped in an instant, without the movement of a limb, or
the vibration of a muscle, as if she had been suddenly transformed
to marble. She received our applauses with a calm countenance, and
an apparent modesty of demeanor, which was doubtless the result of
constitutional apathy, rather than refinement of feeling; for these
jugglers are generally among the most depraved of their caste.”

The reputed wealth and fertile soil of Hindostan have attracted
foreigners from all parts of the world. Some entered as conquerors,
some sought refuge from persecution, and others went there for
commercial purposes. The peculiar manners of these different nations
have become too variously modified to be particularly described.
The Mohammedans, who obtained certain districts by conquest, are
extravagantly fond of pomp and splendor. The nabob Asuf gave a proof
of this in the wedding of his adopted son Vizier Aly. The bridegroom
was about thirteen years of age, the bride ten. The prince could hardly
move under the weight of his jewels. The procession consisted of about
twelve hundred elephants richly caparisoned, of which one hundred in
the centre had _houdas_, or castles, on their backs, covered with
silver. In the midst was the nabob himself, within a _houda_ covered
with gold and set with precious stones. On both sides of the road
was raised artificial scenery of bamboo-work, representing arches,
minarets, and towers, covered with lighted glass lamps. On each side
were carried platforms, covered with gold and silver cloth, on which
were musicians and dancing girls superbly dressed. The ground was
inlaid with fireworks, and at every step of the elephants, rockets and
fiery serpents shot forth, kindling the night into day. Three thousand
flambeaux were likewise carried by men hired for the occasion.

The palanquins in which the wealthy are carried are sometimes very
magnificent. They are painted and gilded, ornamented with gold, silver,
and jewels, with cushions and coverings of crimson velvet.

The religion of Brama, as well as that of Mohammed, forbids women to
appear in public; but the lower classes of Hindoos do not attempt to
comply with the inconvenient requisition. The Mohammedan women, on the
contrary, are extremely punctilious on this point; even the poorest
never venture out of doors without being enveloped in a cotton veil
made like a bag, with a slight net-work over the eyes and mouth. Those
who cannot afford to travel in palanquins, ride astride on a bullock,
which has a bell suspended to the neck, and a bridle passed through the
nostrils. A more uncouth or unpleasant sight cannot well be imagined,
unless it might be a shrouded corpse thus mounted.

Mrs. Graham, in her very entertaining account of India, gives the
following description of a visit to the harem of a Mohammedan chief:
“My sister and I were allowed to enter, but we could by no means
persuade the cazy to admit any of the gentlemen of our family. We
ascended to the women’s apartment by a ladder, which is removed when
not in immediate use, to prevent the ladies from escaping. We were
received by the cazy’s wife’s mother, a fine old woman dressed in
white, and without ornaments, as becomes a widow. The cazy’s mother,
and the rest of his father’s widows, were first presented; then Fatima,
his wife, to whom our visit was paid; and afterward his sisters, some
of them fine, lively young women. They all crowded round us to examine
our dress, and the materials of which it was composed. They were
surprised at our wearing so few ornaments; but we told them it was the
custom of our country, and they replied that it was good. I was not
sorry they so openly expressed their curiosity, as it gave us a better
opportunity of gratifying our own. The apartment in which we were
received was about twenty feet square, and rather low. Round it were
smaller rooms, most of them crowded with small beds, with white muslin
curtains; these were not particularly clean, and the whole suit seemed
close and disagreeable. Most of the women were becomingly dressed.
Fatima’s arms, feet, and neck were covered with rings and chains; her
fingers and toes were loaded with rings; her head was surrounded with a
fillet of pearls, some strings of which crossed it several ways, and
confined her hair, which was knotted up behind. On her forehead hung a
cluster of colored stones, from which depended a large pearl, and round
her face small strings of pearl hung at equal distances. Her ear-rings
were very beautiful; but I do not like the custom of boring the hem of
the ear, and studding it all round with _joys_, or jewels; and not even
Fatima’s beautiful face could reconcile me to the nose jewel. Her large
black eyes (the _chesme ahoo_, or stag eyes, of the eastern poets)
were rendered more striking by the black streaks with which they were
adorned, and lengthened out at the corners. The palms of her hands, the
soles of her feet, and her nails, were stained with henna, a plant, the
juice of whose seeds is of a deep-red color.”

“Fatima’s manner is modest, gentle, and indolent. Before her husband,
she neither lifts her eyes nor speaks, and hardly moves without
permission from the elder ladies of the harem. She presented us with
perfumed sherbet, (a drink little different from lemonade,) fruit,
and sweetmeats, chiefly made of _ghee_, poppy seeds, and sugar. Some
of them were tolerably good, but it required all my politeness to
swallow others. Prepared as I was to expect very little from Mussulman
ladies, I could not help being shocked to find them so totally devoid
of cultivation as I found them. They mutter their prayers, and some
of them read the Koran, but not one in a thousand understands it.
Still fewer can read their own language, or write at all; and the only
work they do is a little embroidery. They string beads, plait colored
threads, sleep, quarrel, make pastry, and chew betel, in the same daily
round. It is only at a death, a birth, or a marriage, that the monotony
of their lives is interrupted. When we took leave, we were sprinkled
with rose-water, and presented with flowers, and betel nut wrapped in
the leaves of an aromatic plant.”

Yet where talent exists it has sometimes found means to manifest
itself, even within the circumscribed limits of the harem.

Many beautiful designs for Cashmere shawls, embroidery, and printed
cottons, have been designed by these secluded women. Mherul-Nisa,
afterward favorite sultana of Jehangire, emperor of Hindostan, being
shut up with other slaves in a mean apartment of the seraglio, exerted
her ingenuity to increase her scanty support. She embroidered splendid
tapestry, painted silks with exquisite skill, and invented a variety
of fanciful ornaments. These being extensively bought, and much
admired in the city of Delhi, excited the emperor’s curiosity. He paid
her a visit; and from that moment she never lost the extraordinary
influence which she suddenly acquired over him. She became his favorite
wife, under the title of Noor Jehan, signifying _the light of the
world_; her relations were placed in the principal employments of the
empire, ranked with princes of the blood, and admitted to the private
apartments of the seraglio; her name was stamped on the coin with that
of the emperor; and the most expensive pageants, consisting of music,
fireworks, and illuminations, were continually kept up to please her.

The discovery of that exquisite perfume called attar of roses is
attributed to Noor Jehan. She had not only baths, but whole canals,
filled with rose-water, that she might enjoy its fragrance. One fine
morning, walking with the emperor along one of these canals, in his
magnificent gardens at Cashmere, she observed a fine scum floating on
the surface. She took up some of it, and perceived that it yielded a
powerful odour. She caused the chemists to examine it, and from it they
produced the essence which has ever since commanded so high a price.
Noor Jehan gave it the name of Atyr Jehangire, in honor of her husband,
and introduced the use of it throughout Hindostan.

Among the foreign nations settled in India are the Parsees, descendants
from the ancient Persians, who, like them, worship fire and sun, not as
God, but as his most perfect symbol. There are among them holy women,
who keep a perpetual fire burning before their habitations, and are
very strict in the observance of religious rites; these women are held
in the highest veneration.

The Parsees, like most other oriental women, are in the habit of
bringing water on their heads from the rivers and wells. They are well
shaped, and almost as fair as Europeans. They have large black eyes,
and aquiline noses. They are married very young, but generally remain
with their parents some time after the wedding. The Parsees are allowed
to marry but one wife, and she must be of their own nation.

The Hindoos in general believe in witchcraft. If the crops are
blighted, sickness prevails, or any unusual misfortunes occur, they
write the names of all the women in the village on branches of the
saul-tree, and let them remain in water four hours and a half; if
any branch withers, the person whose name is on it is decided to
be a witch. Other superstitious ordeals are likewise resorted to,
and certain forms of investigation are gone through with, which not
unfrequently end in the death of the accused.

They believe in the existence of demons, and use various exorcisms to
expel them from those who are possessed. Women are almost always the
persons in whom these evil spirits are supposed to have fixed their
residence.

The Hindoos people the stars, the air, the woods, and the ocean with
deities; among which the goddesses are about as numerous as the gods.
The two most conspicuous are Saraswadi, goddess of literature and the
arts, and Parvati, goddess of time and of enchantments; the latter,
like Venus, was born of the foam of the sea, and is the mother of
Love. The Hindoo Cupid is called Camdeo, or Manmadin. His bow is of
sugar-cane, his arrows made of flowers, and pointed with honey-comb.
He is usually represented riding on a parrot, and is particularly
worshipped by women desirous to obtain faithful lovers and good
husbands.

English residents are numerous in Hindostan, where they preserve
their national customs, slightly varied by climate and surrounding
circumstances. India has been a great marriage-market, on account
of the emigration of young enterprising Englishmen, without a
corresponding number of women. Faded belles, and destitute female
orphans, were sure of finding husbands in India. Some persons actually
undertook to import women to the British settlements, in order to
sell them to rich Europeans, or nabobs, who would give a good price
for them. How the importers acquired a right thus to dispose of them
is not mentioned; it is probable that the women themselves, from
extreme poverty, or some other cause, consented to become articles of
speculation upon consideration of receiving a certain remuneration. In
September, 1818, the following advertisement appeared in the Calcutta
Advertiser: “_Females raffled for_. Be it known that six fair pretty
young ladies, with two sweet engaging children, lately imported from
Europe, having the roses of health blooming on their cheeks, and
joy sparkling in their eyes, possessing amiable tempers, and highly
accomplished, whom the most indifferent cannot behold without rapture,
are to be raffled for next door to the British Gallery. Twelve tickets
at twelve rupees each; the highest of the three doubtless takes the
most fascinating.”

The wives of respectable Hindoos are very rarely seen in the street
with their husbands, unless they are going a journey. When they see an
English-woman walk arm-in-arm with her husband, they are exceedingly
shocked, and exclaim, “Oh! ah! do you see this? They take their wives
by the hand and lead them about, showing them to other English. These
people have no shame.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The inhabitants of Thibet are marked by a Chinese cast of countenance;
small black eyes, with long pointed corners, with eyelashes and
eyebrows extremely thin. Ladies of rank extend the corner of the
eyelids towards the temples as far as possible, by artificial means.
They are fond of ornaments, and wear a profusion of coral and amber
necklaces, to which are suspended images of their gods, forms of
prayer, or sentences from their sacred writings. The most wealthy wear
chaplets of large gems, such as rubies, lapis-lazuli, &c.; and their
black hair is, on state occasions, almost entirely concealed by heaps
of pearl, emeralds, and coral.

Matrimony is rather dishonorable in Thibet. A marriage contract forms
an almost insuperable obstacle to the attainment of political rank or
influence. Hence ambitious parents are desirous of placing their sons
in the monasteries, where no woman is allowed to enter, and where a vow
of perpetual celibacy is taken. Every family consisting of more than
four boys is obliged to devote one of them to this recluse life.

There are likewise in Thibet female devotees, who, like nuns, devote
themselves entirely to celibacy and the duties of religion. They do not
use a rosary to facilitate their prayers; but, instead of this, they
have a painted barrel, with gilt letters on it, placed upright in a
case, which has an opening to admit the hand. It revolves upon an axis,
and as they twirl it round, they repeat certain appointed words.

The Thibetian customs with regard to marriage are very extraordinary.
One woman is the wife of a whole family of brothers, be they ever
so numerous. This custom is not confined to the lower ranks, but
prevails in the most opulent families. The oldest brother has the
right of choice. The courtship is very brief, and the marriage quite
unceremonious. If the parents of the damsel approve his request, they
carry their daughter to his house, where the relations meet and carouse
for three days, with music and dancing. The priests, who are bound to
shun the sight of women, have no share in the scene. Mutual consent is
the only bond of union. The engagement thus formed cannot be dissolved,
unless both the parties consent to a separation; and even where this
is the case, they are never after at liberty to form a new connection.
These women, who are said to be very jealous of their husbands, enjoy
a degree of freedom and consideration unknown to the Hindoos. They are
the acknowledged mistresses of their family, have liberty to go where
they please, and are generally well supported by the joint earnings of
their numerous partners. When captain Turner was at Teshoo Loomboo, he
was acquainted with five brothers, who all lived together in the utmost
harmony and affection, with one wife among them all. The first-born
child belongs to the oldest brother, the second to the next of age, and
so on.

Instances of infidelity are said to be rare. In such cases, a man
is condemned to pay a pecuniary fine; a woman receives corporeal
punishment. Public opinion is said not to be very fastidious concerning
the character of unmarried females.

In Thibet, the exchange of scarfs accompanies almost all the courtesies
of life. When a visit is paid, scarfs are exchanged; and every letter
is accompanied with a scarf, however distant may be its place of
destination. White and red are in use; but the former is considered
more genteel, and is respectful in proportion to its fineness. These
scarfs are soft, thin, glossy, and of dazzling whiteness. They are
woven with damask figures, and usually have some sacred motto near the
fringe at the ends.

Women of the laboring classes are inured to a great deal of toil. They
plant, weed, reap, and thresh grain, and are exposed to the roughest
weather, while their indolent husbands are perhaps living at their ease.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Birmans in their features resemble the Chinese. The women,
especially those belonging to the northern districts, are fairer than
the Hindoos, but less delicately formed, being generally inclined to
corpulence. Their hair is black, coarse, and long. Both sexes color the
teeth, the eyelashes, and the edges of their eyelids, with black. When
women are in full dress, they stain their nails and the palms of their
hands red, and strew their faces and bosoms with powder of sandal-wood,
or of a bark called _sunneka_.

The hair is usually tied at the top of the head, and the fillet worn
by people of rank is embroidered, and adorned with jewels. A long
piece of silk or cloth is fastened round the waist, and falls to
the feet, sometimes trailing on the ground. The upper part of the
person is covered by a loose jacket, with long tight sleeves; but the
lower garment being open, it is impossible to walk without exposing
the limbs, in a manner that would be regarded as very indelicate by
Europeans. Wealthy women wear shoes, that turn up with a pointed toe;
the peasantry go barefoot. Girls are taught at an early age to invert
their arms, so that the protruding joint of the elbow comes inside, and
gives the arm the appearance of being broken.

The Birmans have less personal cleanliness than the Hindoos, who,
though they seldom wash their garments, consider frequent bathing a
religious duty. Though separated from the Hindoos only by a narrow
range of mountains, they are strikingly unlike them in character. The
Birmans are lively, active, and impatient. Their wives and daughters
are allowed the same degree of freedom in social intercourse with men,
as prevails in European society. Marriage is a purely civil contract,
over which the priesthood have no jurisdiction. The law allows but one
wife; but the wealthy usually keep a number of mistresses, who reside
under the same roof with the wife, and are subject to her control. When
she goes abroad, they attend her, bearing her betel-box, fan, &c.; and
when the husband dies, they become the widow’s property, unless he has
specifically emancipated them.

The formalities of courtship and marriage are similar to those of
India. If the first private proposal be well received by the damsel
and her parents, the relatives meet to agree concerning her dowry; the
bridegroom sends a present of dresses and jewels, according to his
wealth; the parents of the bride give a feast, and written contracts
are signed; the new-married couple eat out of the same dish; the
bridegroom presents the bride with some pickled tea, she returns the
compliment, and thus ends the ceremony.

Divorces may be obtained under peculiar circumstances, but they are
attended with a good deal of expense. The women are generally virtuous;
for their constant occupation leaves little leisure for the mind to
become corrupted. Ladies of the highest rank are busy at the labors of
the loom. When the British envoy made a formal visit to the queen’s
mother, he found her maidens in the gallery of the palace, weaving
with the utmost activity. Nearly all the cotton and silk used in
the Birman empire is woven at home by the women. Indeed, they take
an active share in the general superintendence both of out-door and
in-door transactions. When the governor of Maindu had a large ship on
the stocks, his wife was seen to cross the river every morning in her
husband’s barge, attended by female servants; she took her seat on the
timbers, and superintended the workmen for hours; and she seldom failed
to come again in the evening, to see that the day’s task had been
completed. The Englishmen, who observed her, said her husband never
accompanied her, and she appeared to have no need of his assistance.

But notwithstanding the Birmese ladies enjoy so much more of freedom
and confidence than their neighbors, they share something of the
degradation imposed upon all Asiatic women. Their evidence is not
deemed equal to that of a man, and they are not allowed to ascend the
steps of a court of justice, but are obliged to give their testimony
outside of the building. A man who cannot pay his debts is liable to be
sold, with his wife and children; hence innocent, industrious women not
unfrequently suffer most cruelly for the vices or indolence of their
husbands. Sometimes when criminals are condemned to death, the helpless
wife and children share his punishment. When driven by poverty,
the lower class of Birmans do not hesitate to sell their wives and
daughters to foreign residents. Women are not considered as dishonored
by these circumstances, and seem easily to resign themselves to their
lot. They are generally very faithful to their new owners, and render
themselves useful by keeping accounts, and aiding in the transaction
of business. But foreigners are never allowed to carry these women or
their children out of the country. If a vessel were discovered with a
Birmese female on board, it would never again be allowed to enter any
of their ports.

Orders of monks are established in the Birman empire, and formerly
there were establishments of nuns; but, for political reasons, a law
was passed forbidding any woman to seclude herself from society by a
religious vow.

Female mourners are hired to chant dirges at funerals. Dancing and
singing girls are introduced at entertainments, and some of them are
said to be extremely graceful. In the month of April they celebrate
a merry festival, by throwing as much water as they please upon
whomsoever they meet; but in this, as in all their amusements, the
Birmans are scrupulously decorous toward women. They may throw water
upon any girl who is the first aggressor, but they must not lay hands
upon her; neither are they allowed to molest any female, who does not
choose to join in the merriment of the season.

The women of the Arracan mountains tattoo their faces all over in
segments of circles, which give them a hideous appearance. These half
savage tribes consider a flat forehead the perfection of beauty, and in
order to produce it, they lay a heavy plate of lead upon the brow of
infants. The inhabitants of Pegu are passionately addicted to tattooing.

       *       *       *       *       *

The inhabitants of Tonquin and Cochin China, though similar to the
Chinese in features, written language, and religious ceremonies, are
very unlike them in character, and in some of their customs. The
Cochin Chinese are lively, talkative, and familiar; and they suffer
their women to be quite as gay and unrestrained as themselves. The
middling and lower classes of women are indeed condemned to laborious
occupations. They stand in the water from morning till night,
transplanting rice; they till the ground; assist in repairing the mud
cottages; manufacture coarse earthen-ware; manage boats; carry produce
to market; gather the cotton, spin, weave, and color it; and then
make it into garments for themselves and families. Their endurance of
hardship is so remarkable, that the Cochin Chinese proverb says: “A
woman has nine lives, and bears a great deal of killing.”

The law makes no restriction as to the number of wives; but the first
espoused takes precedence of the others. If married parties choose
to separate, they break one of their copper coins, or a pair of
chop-sticks, in the presence of witnesses, and the union is dissolved;
but the husband must restore all the property his wife possessed before
marriage.

Men consider their wives as an inferior race, and sell them when they
please. They are shamefully indifferent about their moral character,
if they can obtain money by their vices. Women living thus without
the encouragement or restraint of public opinion, and without the
sweet reward of domestic esteem and confidence, are generally
vicious, wherever there is the least temptation to be so. There are,
however, severe laws, which are enforced when husbands think proper
to appeal to them. Sometimes an unfaithful wife is trampled to death
by elephants, and sometimes both of the offending parties are tied
together and thrown into the river. The women are dark and coarse
featured, with blackened teeth, and small pretensions to beauty; but
there is something pleasing in their perpetual cheerfulness and lively
good-nature. They take great pride in long hair, considering the
reverse as a token of degeneracy, and a mark of vulgarity.

The Cochin Chinese have dramatic performances, in which female actors
are introduced. Their voices, when singing, are said to be shrill and
warbling, and their dancing full of graceful gestures and attitudes.

Men and women of the common class dress nearly alike. Both wear a brown
or blue frock, with black nankeen trowsers, made very wide. They have
neither stockings nor shoes. The women wear their long hair sometimes
twisted on the top of the head, and sometimes hanging in loose flowing
tresses. To shield them from the sun they have broad hats, like an
inverted saucer, woven with the fibres of bamboo, and made impervious
to water by means of a fine varnish. These hats are fastened under the
chin by a slender wooden bow, like the handle of a pail; the rich have
it made of ivory, ebony, silver, or gold. The higher classes dress very
much like the wealthy Chinese. Both ladies and gentlemen, when they go
abroad, have attendants to carry their fans, and a box made of fragrant
wood, often inlaid with gold and silver, to contain their areca, betel,
&c. Garments are seldom changed till they begin to fall in pieces, and
their habits are in general so uncleanly that a near approach to them
is not pleasant.

The Siamese are a tawny people, with short black hair, which both sexes
cut quite short. They have faces broad in the middle, and narrowing
toward the forehead and the chin. Their ears are naturally large; and,
like many other nations in the torrid zone, they weigh them down with
heavy ornaments, so that one might thrust several fingers through the
distended apertures.

Long nails, particularly on the right hand, are considered a mark of
gentility. They often attain a growth of several inches; and when women
wish to be particularly elegant, they wear artificial ones four inches
long.

The Siamese bathe very frequently, and anoint themselves with perfumes.
The interior of their houses is likewise very neat. They seldom wear
any ornament about the head, except ear-rings; and none but the young
wear bracelets. Their common clothing is very slight; consisting merely
of a large piece of calico, tied above the hips, and falling to the
feet.

Women enjoy a considerable degree of freedom. When a young man sends
his female friends to ask a damsel in marriage, her parents consult
their daughter’s inclination; and if they approve the match, magicians
are immediately called to cast nativities and consult the stars for
omens. The lover pays two or three visits to his betrothed, bringing
presents of fruit and betel. At the third visit, the relations sign
contracts, and pay the dowry. A few days after, the priests sprinkle
the young couple with consecrated water, and repeat prayers. The
bride’s parents keep up feasting, dancing, and music for several
days; and sometimes months elapse before the young people commence
house-keeping for themselves.

The Siamese laws allow of several wives, but the wealthy only avail
themselves of this indulgence. Superior privileges are conferred on the
first wife, and upon her children. The children of the others are not
allowed to use the familiar appellation of “father,” but are required
to say, “Mr. father.” The first wife may be divorced, but cannot be
sold, like the others. In case of divorce, she may claim the first,
third, fifth child, and so on, through the odd numbers. The husband has
a right to all the even numbers; of course, the mother sometimes has a
larger share than the father.

All the property left by a husband belongs to the first wife. She
likewise inherits his authority; but she cannot sell the even-number
children, who in case of division would have belonged to their father.

The poorer classes work on the land, and transact business for their
husbands, during the half of each year, which they are obliged to
spend in the service of a despotic prince. They take great care of
their children, especially of their daughters, and are generally very
virtuous and modest. The Siamese, unlike their neighbors of Cochin
China, are very scrupulous concerning the character of their women,
with which they conceive their own honor to be intimately connected.
Their laws are very severe. An unfaithful wife is exposed alive to
tigers, or sold as a slave.

These people have a singular religious ceremony, which reminds one of
the Jewish scape-goat. An infamous woman is carried about on a barrow,
accompanied with trumpets and hautboys. Every one curses her, and
pelts her with dirt. She is then carried out of the town, left among
bushes and thorns, and forbidden ever to return to the city. They have
a superstition that this ceremony will avert all threatened evils from
them to her.

The Siamese priests are not allowed to marry, on pain of being burnt to
death.

There are female convents in Siam, but no woman is allowed to take the
vow before she is fifty years old. When a man is condemned for any
crime, his innocent family suffer with him; and wives and children are
not unfrequently gambled away at games of chance. The women marry very
young. It is a common thing to see wives and mothers of twelve years
old.

Like other nations in the vicinity, they smoke a good deal, and
universally color their teeth black.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Malays are a proud and revengeful people, excessively jealous of
their women. The lower classes of females are, however, allowed to
go about in public, and transact various kinds of business, with a
hardihood that braves all manner of fatigue and exposure. The women, of
course, imbibe something of the fierce character of the men. No love
can hope to find favor in their eyes, until he can produce a number of
human skulls, which he has severed from the bodies. When attacked by
enemies, they fight by the side of their husbands and brothers, with a
fiery courage amounting to desperation.

Their manner of living is almost as simple and rude as that of
savages. The women are generally well shaped, with tawny complexions,
oval faces, expressive eyes, large mouths with thin lips, and teeth
blackened by chewing betel. They are fond of gallantry, dress, and
jewels. The higher class wear a muslin garment, descending to the feet,
and fastened with a girdle at the waist; and to this they add a short
jacket. They frequently have ear-rings, bracelets, and gold chains, and
fasten their long shining black hair at the top of the head with a gold
pin. The common people of both sexes dress almost exactly alike; their
clothing consisting merely of a cloth wrapped about the waist, fastened
by a belt, in which they carry their daggers.

The children in Malacca, and the neighboring nations, universally go
without clothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Chinese women have broad unmeaning faces; small, lively eyes,
obliquely placed, with eyelids rounding into each other at the corners,
not forming an angle, as in Europeans; their hair is black; lips
rather thick and rosy; and their complexion is a yellowish brown;
excepting some inhabitants of the northern provinces, who are fairer.
They generally paint their faces so as to give a strong carnation
tint to the whole surface. A foot unnaturally small is considered a
great beauty. In order to attain this, the higher classes bind tight
bandages round the feet of female infants, so that none but the great
toe is suffered to retain its natural position. This compression is
continued until the foot ceases to grow. It is then a misshapen little
stump, four or five inches long, with all the smaller toes adhering
firmly to the sole. The growth thus cruelly checked in its proper
place, increases the ankle to such a clumsy size, that it almost
entirely conceals the foot. When the ladies attempt to walk, they seem
to be moving on stumps, and hobble along in the most awkward manner
imaginable. Their little shoes are as fine as tinsel and embroidery
can make them. According to Chinese history, this custom originated
several centuries go, when a numerous body of women combined together
to overthrow the government; and to prevent the recurrence of a similar
event it was ordained that female infants should wear wooden shoes,
so small as to cramp their feet and render them useless. Some writers
have supposed that this singular practice originated in the jealousy
of Chinese husbands, who contrived this method to keep their wives
at home; but this seems very improbable. The Persians, who seclude
their women with much greater rigor than the Chinese, do not think
it necessary to disable their feet; nor would such a precaution be
a safeguard against intrigues. The reason of this, as well as other
customs equally strange, may probably be found in the caprice of
fashion; and while unnaturally small feet are considered by Chinese
men as a charming indication of elegant helplessness, the Chinese women
will no doubt endure any degree of suffering to attain the enviable
distinction.

Chinese hands are exceedingly small. The ladies keep them concealed by
long wide cuffs, and consider it immodest to let them appear, even in
presence of male relations. Both sexes, among the wealthy, suffer the
finger nails to grow to an immense length, to show that they perform no
labor. Sometimes they are said to be from eight to twelve inches long.
In order to preserve them from being broken, they are obliged to keep
them in light bamboo cases. The ladies generally comb their hair back
from the face, and pluck out their eyebrows, so as to leave only a very
thin arch. They wear their robes so long as to conceal the person from
the throat to the toes. The garments of the higher classes are made of
the richest materials, but are clumsy and inelegant. The usual colors
are red, blue, and green. Though the Chinese ladies have no opportunity
to rival each other in the conquest of hearts, they are nevertheless
very fond of ornaments, especially about the head. Bunches of silver or
gilt flowers are always interspersed among their ringlets, in greater
or less profusion; and sometimes they wear the _fong-hoang_ or Chinese
_phœnix_, made of silver gilt, and so arranged as to move with the
slightest motion of the wearer. The spreading tail forms a glittering
aigrette on the middle of the head, and the wings wave over the front.

The Chinese trace the institution of marriage as far back as their
first sovereign, Fo-Hi, supposed to be coeval with Noah. The law
permits but one wife; but though the emperor only can legally keep
several mistresses, custom sanctions the practice, and it generally
prevails among all who can afford it. These women are generally
purchased as slaves, and the wife has control over them and their
children; but the latter have a right to a share of the paternal
inheritance. These female slaves call the lawful wife “mother,” and
at her death are obliged to observe the same ceremonies of mourning
prescribed for a real parent.

The emperor never marries a foreign princess. When he ascends the
throne, people of the highest rank present their youngest and
handsomest daughters to him, that he may choose a wife among them. The
empress, who is called _Hoang-heou_, has peculiar prerogatives; and
her family acquire great credit and influence. Next to the empress in
rank are two queens with their numerous attendants; and the third rank
consists of six queens and their attendants. The children of all these
women are considered a part of the imperial family. The emperor has
arbitrary power to name his successor, either in his family or out of
it; but he generally chooses one of the sons of the empress.

The emperor’s daughters never succeed to the throne. They are usually
married to Tartar princes, and mandarins of high rank, who always
consider such an alliance a mark of distinction. The great men of the
Celestial Empire keep their women most carefully concealed from all
eyes but their own. If there is occasion to remove them from one place
of residence to another, they are conveyed in close carriages, with
gauze drawn over the small windows, and a eunuch to guard them on each
side. On state occasions, they are sometimes admitted to the theatre,
where they are concealed behind a screen of close lattice-work. The
scenes represented on the Chinese stage are said to be so indecent
and disgusting, that European spectators are absolutely driven away.
They have no actresses. Female characters are performed by beardless
young men, in the costume of women. The ladies amuse themselves with
embroidery, music, dancing, puppet-shows, and painting birds, flowers,
and insects, on rice-paper, or thin gauze. Some of the emperors,
willing to gratify the curiosity of their wives, built within the parks
of their palaces miniature towns, to represent, on a small scale,
the most remarkable objects in Pekin. The gardens belonging to the
imperial palaces are exceedingly picturesque and beautiful. Here the
princes spend many tranquil hours, while their wives play on musical
instruments, and their children frolic around them.

Chinese education consists principally in learning certain ceremonials
of behavior; such as what kind of salutation to make to a superior,
what to an inferior, how to give a present, and how to receive one.
When an emperor dies, his widows cannot marry again. They are removed
to a palace peculiarly appropriated to their use, and never again
allowed to leave it. It was formerly customary to immolate a number of
slaves on the grave of an emperor, or prince; but this has given place
to the harmless custom of burning images of tinfoil, cut in the human
form.

A bridegroom knows nothing of the character or person of his intended
wife, except what he gathers from the report of some female relative,
or confidant, who undertakes to arrange the marriage, and determine
the sum that shall be paid for the bride. Very severe laws are made
to prevent deception and fraud in these transactions. On the day
appointed for the wedding, the damsel is placed in a close palanquin,
the key of which is sent to the bridegroom, by the hands of some trusty
domestic. Her relations and friends, accompanied by squalling music,
escort her to his house; at the gate of which he stands in full dress,
ready to receive her. He eagerly opens the palanquin and examines his
bargain. If he is pleased, she enters his dwelling, and the marriage
is celebrated with feasting and rejoicing; the men and women being all
the time in separate apartments. If the bridegroom is dissatisfied, he
shuts the palanquin, and sends the woman back to her relations; but
when this happens, he must pay another sum of money equal to the price
he first gave for her. A woman who unites beauty with accomplishments
brings from four to seven hundred louis d’ors; some sell for less than
one hundred. The apartments of the women are separated from those of
the men by a wall, at which a guard is stationed. The wife is never
allowed to eat with her husband; she cannot quit her apartments without
permission; and he does not enter hers without first asking leave.
Brothers are entirely separated from their sisters at the age of nine
or ten years.

Divorces are allowed in cases of criminality, mutual dislike, jealousy,
incompatibility of temper, or too much loquacity on the part of the
wife.

The Chinese character is grave, ceremonious, and taciturn. It is said
that women are in the habit of answering concisely, and seldom speak
unless spoken to; nevertheless the Chinese proverb declares, “What
women have lost in their feet they have gained in their tongues.” If
female loquacity be a ground for divorce, it may render the marriage
contract very precarious, even in China. A husband can neither put
away his wife, nor sell her, until a divorce is legally obtained. If
she leaves him, he may immediately commence an action at law, by the
sentence of which she becomes his slave, and he is at liberty to sell
her to whom he pleases. If he leaves her for three years, she may, by
permission of the mandarins, marry again; but if she were to anticipate
their consent, she would be liable to very severe punishment.

A husband has always a right to sell an unfaithful wife for a slave.
Women do not inherit property, but it may be left to them by will.

Next to submission, industry is inculcated as the greatest of female
virtues. The following are extracts from a Chinese ballad: “Employment
is the guardian of female innocence; do not allow women time to be
idle; let them be the first dressed, and the last undressed, all the
year round.”

“No in-door household work is repugnant to a modest and sensible woman.
The shuttle and the needle are only the occupation of her leisure; the
neatness of her house is the work of her cares; and it is her glory
either to nurse the sick, or prepare a repast.”

“The pearls and precious stones, the silk and gold with which a
coquette so studiously bedecks herself, are a transparent varnish which
makes all her defects the more apparent.”

It seems difficult to imagine such a thing as coquetry, where there are
no opportunities for display. However, the Chinese must be more stupid
than women in general, if they are beautiful and cannot contrive some
means to let the world know it. Travellers say they have sometimes seen
pretty Chinese girls sitting smoking pipes at the doors, but that they
always ran away at their approach. Perhaps when they see a young man of
their own nation and rank, they take time to knock the ashes from their
pipes before they run.

Most of the houses in cities have terrace roofs, on which flowers
and shrubs are planted; and these form a favorite promenade for the
ladies. The Chinese being a sedentary people, their florists, fruit
dealers, &c. are obliged to walk about the streets crying their goods;
mantuamakers, carrying a basket with the implements of their trade,
march round in search of customers, which are not very numerous in a
land where the fashions never change; fortune-tellers, mountebanks,
and jugglers, squeaking on a wretched flute, likewise go from house to
house, and are beckoned to call where their services are required.

The wealthy make great rejoicings at the birth of a child, particularly
if it be a son. They boil great quantities of eggs hard, prepare rice
after a peculiar fashion, and send these, with dainties of various
kinds, to their relatives and friends. On the third day the child is
washed, and new feasts are given. Hundreds of eggs, called _third-day
eggs_, are roasted and painted all manner of colors. Relations and
friends in their turn present the same kind of eggs, with all sorts of
pastry and sweetmeats.

The oldest Chinese writers attribute the first invention of spinning
to the wife of their emperor Yao, and the discovery of silk to one of
the wives of their emperor Hoang-Ti. From that time, the empresses have
been in the habit of breeding, rearing, and feeding silkworms, reeling
the cocoons, and working the silk. Until the last dynasty, there was a
mulberry grove in the gardens of the palace. Every year, the empress,
accompanied by the queens and the other principal ladies of the court,
went to this grove with great solemnity and gathered leaves from the
branches, which her attendants lowered within her reach. The finest
pieces of silk, which were made under her own inspection, and at
which she often worked, were destined for the ceremony of the great
sacrifice to Chang-Ti.

In the silk establishments the care of the insects is intrusted to an
intelligent woman called _Tsam-Mou_, or _Mother of the Worms_. She is
not allowed to perform the duties of her office, unless she has just
bathed, and put on perfectly clean clothes. She must not have eaten
recently, or touched wild endive, the smell of which is considered
injurious to the young worms. She wears thin light robes, that she may
be able to judge of the heat of the room; for the Chinese do not use
thermometers in these establishments. The indifference with which the
silk reelers plunge their hands into boiling water, in order to recover
the cocoon when the thread breaks, is truly astonishing. Bowls of cold
water are kept near, to soothe the pain. The skin on the hands of these
women becomes very thick and tough.

When the Chinese women are engaged in embroidery, or any other
sedentary employment, they are usually seated on large china jars
instead of chairs. Their mirrors are of highly polished copper, which
they prefer to glass.

It is said that the leaves of the best kind of tea are rolled
separately by the fingers of a woman appointed to the business. Females
of the lower classes endure as much labor and fatigue as the men. A
wife sometimes drags the plough in rice fields with an infant tied upon
her back, while her husband performs the less arduous task of holding
the plough.

No Chinese female is allowed to leave the celestial empire, nor is any
foreign woman permitted to pass the frontiers. A European woman, who
once endeavored to enter Pekin in disguise, was discovered, and came
very near losing her life. In two or three instances Chinese women have
escaped secretly, and been exhibited as great curiosities in Europe and
America; but their punishment would be very severe, should they again
come under the laws of China. These strict regulations are doubtless
made to prevent the introduction of new fashions, and democratic
ideas, to disturb the dead calm that prevails in a country where the
individuals of each class are entirely subservient to the one above
it, and where women of all classes are allowed a very small share of
personal freedom.

The custom of exposing infants, principally daughters, prevails in
China, as well as in some parts of Hindostan. Every morning five carts
drawn by buffaloes traverse the streets of Pekin to pick up babes, whom
parents are either unable or unwilling to support, as well as those
whose lifeless bodies are thus exposed to avoid the great expenses
attending burial. The dead infants are conveyed to a public cemetery,
and the living are placed in a charitable asylum. As the streets of
Chinese cities swarm with hungry dogs and swine, the fate of these poor
innocents is sometimes horrible. Catholic and Mohammedan missionaries
station themselves at the gate of the cemetery, to save such as appear
to have any remains of life. Sailors and fishermen often put their
new-born infants into gourds and toss them into the water, where
they perish, unless some kind hand is stretched forth to save them.
The children thus cruelly exposed are usually girls, because they are
less likely to be profitable to poor parents than boys, and it is more
difficult to bring them up.

It is supposed that as many as twenty or thirty thousand infants are
annually exposed in the Chinese empire. These scenes principally occur
in cities, and are more frequent in seasons of scarcity.

The Chinese celebrate the commencement of the year with great
festivities. The tribunals and shops are closed, the posts stopped,
and all business, public and private, suspended; presents are given,
children formally pay respects to their parents; mandarins do the same
to their superior officers, and servants to their masters. This is
called “taking leave of the old year.” In the evening, all the family
partake of a great feast, to which no stranger is admitted; but the
next day they are more social, and spend the whole time in feasting and
amusements. The celebration is concluded by brilliant illuminations in
the evening.

Chinese children are not allowed to make the remotest allusion to the
infirmities of old age, in the presence of their father or mother. If
their father be in mourning for any relative, they must abstain from
playing on instruments; and they must give up music, all kinds of
entertainments, and even bright-colored dresses, if their father or
mother is ill.

White is the mourning color among the Chinese. A son cannot wear it
while his parents are alive, but he can wear no other for three years
after their death; and even after this period of mourning is ended, his
garments must ever be of one color.

The emperor Kien-Long having fallen in love with a beautiful young girl
at Sanchou-Fou, his empress hung herself. One of her sons was very
much embarrassed to know what course to pursue. To go into mourning
might seem like an insult to his father; and to omit it would be
disrespectful to the memory of his mother. By the advice of his tutor,
he appeared with a full dress over a suit of mourning. This enraged the
emperor so much, that he gave his son a violent kick, which occasioned
his death a few days after.

Every morning, at daybreak, a Chinese son is required to present his
father and mother with water to wash their hands, and stand ready to
perform any trifling services they may require. Filial obedience is
carried to such an extreme, that a son is bound to divorce his wife
if she be displeasing to his parents. Even the emperor himself is not
exonerated from these obligations. When the mother of Kien-Long died,
all the mandarins were ordered to go into mourning for seventeen days,
and to abstain from all amusements. No person of any rank was allowed
to shave for the space of one hundred days, or to partake of any
entertainment. For one month, people were not permitted to marry; and
in the most crowded streets all classes refrained from speaking, except
in whispers. The will of that princess is a curious document:

“Though unworthy, high Heaven has bestowed upon me its choicest favors.
I received from the blessed ancestors of my husband the most valuable
of all gifts, when I brought into the world a son destined to succeed
him. The emperor, always full of tenderness and respect for his mother,
has omitted nothing that lay in his power to render my life happy. He
never failed to come every morning and evening either to salute me,
or to see me eat. He was constantly contriving means to gratify my
heart. He danced in my presence, recited the poems he composed, showed
me paintings which no hand but his own had touched, and decorated my
apartments with them himself. All these attentions penetrated to the
bottom of my soul. I forgot my age, and my old frame was filled with
new vigor.”

At the close of the long and magnificent procession which followed this
empress to her grave, were pages bearing her mirrors, boxes, jewels,
fans, &c.; and last of all the walking stick on which she had leaned in
her old age, was carried along with peculiar veneration.

The Chinese books are full of anecdotes of filial piety. “The mother of
Ouang-Ouei-Yuen had ever expressed great apprehensions of thunder, and
when she saw it approaching always requested her son not to leave her.
After her death, whenever he heard a storm coming on, he hastened to
his mother’s grave, and said softly, ‘I am here, mother.’”

Another story is told of a young woman whose mother-in-law, being
without teeth, could not take food without great exertion. Her dutiful
step-daughter nursed her several years from her own breast often rising
in the night to afford her nourishment.

In the month of April, the Chinese visit the tombs of their parents,
however distant, to pluck up the weeds, repeat certain ceremonies,
and deposit wine and provisions. When the Tartars invaded China, they
availed themselves of the filial piety of the people, and marched
against them with their captive mothers ranged in front of the troops.
In some cases, where this experiment was tried, the women fell by
their own hands, calling out to their sons to revenge the death of
those who would not consent to be an obstacle in the way of their
courage. At this trying period the Chinese women, disguised as men,
labored with the utmost zeal, carrying wood, stones, &c. to rebuild the
fortifications.

A widow of any considerable rank seldom marries again. Those of high
station esteem it a sacred duty to show this mark of veneration for the
memory of a husband, even if they have been but a few days married, or
even if the marriage contract had been settled at the time of his death.

The poorer classes of widows are often sold for the benefit of their
deceased husband’s relations, who are desirous of regaining the money
originally paid for them. The arrangement is often made without their
knowledge, and in spite of their resistance. As soon as the bargain
is concluded; the new proprietor sends a palanquin well guarded, and
the widow is locked up in it, and sent to his house. If avaricious
relatives force a woman to this step before the customary period
of mourning expires, she can obtain redress by application to the
mandarins. A widow who is averse to a second marriage, and has no one
on whom she can rely to repay the original price, may avoid it by
becoming a _bonze_ or _nun_. Of these there are two orders in China.
One have their heads shaved, and covered with a black cap, wear dark
robes, and live together in communities, like convents; the other class
dress more elegantly, and are not confined to any particular place of
abode. The female bonzes are not as numerous, or so much respected, as
formerly. In 1787, one of them, who pretended to perform miracles, and
predict future events, gained such unbounded influence over the minds
of women of rank and wealth, that her vanity and ostentation became
excessive. She received homage on a kind of throne, and ventured to
wear the light yellow robes appropriated to the imperial family. Until
this period, Chinese women had been allowed to visit temples served by
these priestesses; but the enraged emperor, having put the ambitious
bonze to death, forthwith issued the following decree: “All persons
of the female sex, of whatever quality and condition, are forbidden
upon any pretext whatsoever to enter a temple, or to quit their houses
except in cases of absolute necessity. Fathers, husbands, brothers,
sons, or relatives, are commanded to keep them at home, upon pain of
being themselves severely punished. After this prohibition, any woman
who shall enter a temple shall be apprehended and imprisoned, till
some one shall appear to claim her, and to undergo the punishment due
to his negligence.”

By the despotic laws of China a man not only suffers for his own
crimes, but it is often ordained that his wife, all his mistresses, his
children, and his near relations, shall be put to death, or sold into
slavery. Suicide is said to be more common with both sexes in China,
than in any part of the world.

The habits of this singular people are very uncleanly. They seldom wash
their garments, and do not, like most Asiatics, bathe frequently. It is
said that the bandages round the women’s little feet sometimes drop to
pieces without ever having been changed.

Great numbers of people live continually in boats on the water. The
children are tied to the raft with ropes, so that they can run about;
and sometimes their mothers fasten an empty gourd about their necks, to
keep them above water, in case they fall overboard. Many persons born
in these floating dwellings never quit them till they die.

Some of the Chinese customs are much despised by their Tartar
conquerors. The Tartar women, instead of cramping their feet, add to
their natural length by shoes with a long curved toe. The Chinese, in
derision, call them Tartar junks, from the resemblance they bear to
those vessels. These women have a frank confident look, and appear
freely in the streets, either walking, riding on horseback after the
fashion of men, or carried by two bearers on a little open carriage
supported by one wheel. Like the Chinese women, they cover their faces
with paint, but have naturally a more delicate complexion. They are in
general well formed. A small waist is regarded by them as a peculiar
characteristic of beauty. Their hair is turned up all round, tied on
the top of the head, after the Chinese fashion, and almost always
adorned with flowers. The constant habit of smoking and chewing betel
makes their teeth yellow.

At the new and full moon Tartar women sacrifice to a household god,
called the Spirit of the Door. Two lighted tapers are placed on a small
altar, and leaves of gold and silver paper are burned in a pan of
perfumes. This is done with the idea of warding off certain malignant
influences, which might bring disasters on the dwelling.

Many of the conquerors, who did not bring wives with them, married
Chinese women, and their descendants are still called Tartars. It
is said that when they conquered the province of Nankin, they made
prisoners of all the women, whom they did not choose to appropriate
to themselves. Old and young were tied up in sacks, and sold at the
same price. A Chinese artisan, who had but ten shillings, went to
market, with the rest, to try his luck. His money was exactly the price
required; so he seized a sack, slung it over his shoulders, and pushed
through the crowd to examine his bargain. When he found he had bought
an ugly old woman, he was so enraged that he was about to throw the
unfortunate creature into the river. But she begged him to spare her
life, assuring him that her sons would amply reward him; and in fact it
proved that he had drawn no inconsiderable prize in this odd lottery.

In the mountainous districts of China is a singular tribe called
the Miao-Tse. They live together in the utmost harmony, under the
government of elders. The men and women dress almost exactly alike.
The men wear ear-rings, and the women carry a sword. Both go barefoot,
and climb the sharpest rocks with the swiftness of mountain goats. The
women roll their hair round a board about a foot long and six inches
broad, to which they fasten the hair with bees-wax, so as to form a
sort of hat. This is very inconvenient when they wish to lie down. They
comb it but three or four times a year, and are obliged to spend hours
in melting the wax before the fire. One of these women defended a fort
against Chinese troops, for more than two months after every other
being but herself was killed. She contrived to fire several muskets in
such a manner as to deceive them with regard to the strength of the
garrison; and at every moment of leisure she collected heaps of large
stones, to hurl down upon them from different places with her foot.

The Coreans, though they in general observe the customs that prevail in
the Chinese empire, do not cripple the feet of their women; and young
people are allowed to marry according to their own inclinations, after
having had free opportunities of becoming acquainted with each other.
In this respect, custom imposes so little restraint, that the lady
often resides at the house of her future father-in-law some time before
her marriage.

The laws of Corea do not allow a plurality of wives; but sanction as
many mistresses as a man can support, provided he keeps them out of
the house. The husband can divorce his wife at pleasure, and leave her
the charge of maintaining his children. In case of unfaithfulness, he
has a right to put her to death. The observance of the marriage vow is
enforced by very severe laws, both with regard to the woman and her
lover.

The class of abandoned females is said to be very large in Chinese
cities.

Yang-Tcheou is famed for the beauty and accomplishments of its women,
many of whom are sold at a high price to the principal nobility in
various parts of the empire.

At Chinese funerals, as often as relations or friends come to look at
the corpse, the women and children set up a dismal cry.

In their pagodas the image of a woman and child, with rays encircling
the head, is often worshipped under the name of “the Sacred Mother.”
It seems difficult to reconcile this circumstance with their early and
strong aversion to the Catholic religion.

In some of their temples there is another image of a woman, whose
attributes seem to correspond with the Lucina of the ancient Romans.

       *       *       *       *       *

The women of Chinese Tartary assemble, to the number of ten or fifteen,
who annually elect a directress. An aged bonze or priest presides, and
sings anthems in praise of their god Fo. These meetings continue seven
days, during which they employ themselves in laying up treasure for the
world to come. This consists of small paper houses painted and gilded,
filled with minikin boxes, in which are little rolls of paper done over
with gold and silver leaf. The houses and their contents are intended
to procure a comfortable home, with all its conveniences, in the world
to come. These miniature dwellings are locked with paper padlocks and
keys; and when a lady dies, the survivors burn the whole with much
ceremony, believing that from the ashes will arise to her just the same
things, only made of real silver and gold.

The Tartars generally lead a wandering life, with no other wealth than
their flocks and herds; though some subsist by fishing, and a few by
agriculture. Their dwellings are usually tents made of felt, and their
food horse-flesh, mare’s milk, and millet. They drink tea, boiled
with milk, butter, and salt. Mare’s milk is said to be deliciously
sweet; but the Tartars will not drink it till it has been fermented
in leather bottles, which are never washed. Their habits are filthy,
and, in common with the Chinese, they have very little delicacy about
their food. Dr. Clarke says he saw a Calmuck girl grinning with delight
because she had succeeded in snatching a portion of a decaying horse
from thirteen hungry dogs. The Tartar women in general perform a
greater share of labor than the men; for it is a prevailing opinion
that they were sent into the world for no other purpose but to be
useful and convenient slaves to the stronger sex. Besides cooking and
other household avocations, they milk the mares, cows, and goats,
take care of the cattle, tan leather, and make garments, mattresses,
pillows, &c., of skins.

The baron de Tott gives the following account of their method of
tailoring: “I approached a group of Tartars assembled round a dead
horse, which they had just skinned. A young man about eighteen, without
clothing, had the hide of the animal thrown over his shoulders. A
woman, who performed the office of tailor with great dexterity, began
by cutting the back of this new dress, following with her scissors the
round of the neck, the fall of the shoulders, the semicircle which
formed the sleeve, and the side of the habit, which was intended to
reach below the knee. She proceeded in the same manner with the other
parts, till the cutting out was finished. The man, who had served as
a mould, then crouched on his hams, while the several pieces were
stitched together; so that in less than two hours he had a good bay
coat, which only needed to be tanned by continual wearing.”

The Mongul race of Tartars are very ugly. Their complexion, which is
naturally fair, becomes tawny by exposure. They have high cheek bones,
broad flat noses, exceedingly small eyes, widely separated and placed
very obliquely, scanty eyebrows, thick lips, and projecting ears. The
infants are said to be so unsightly, that they resemble bear’s cubs
rather than human beings.

The Tartar men and women dress very nearly alike. Both wear wide
trowsers; but the women’s robe reaches to the feet, while that of the
men does not extend further than the knees. The poorest wear garments
made of the skins of animals, with the hair turned inside in winter,
and outside in summer. Some wear woollen, others linen; and the khans,
or princes, with their families, sometimes wear embroidered silks and
brocades, trimmed with rich furs. Tartar women of all classes are very
fond of ornaments. Their ear-rings are plain hoops of metal, to which
strings of beads, or pieces of mother-of-pearl, are suspended. The neck
and bosom is often covered with a net-work of beads, and their caps
are frequently embroidered with beads, or covered with coins, laid one
over another, like shingles on the roof of a house. The shape of these
caps vary with the different tribes; some are conical, some round, and
others exactly resemble a bishop’s mitre.

Married women may generally be distinguished from unmarried, by the
arrangement of the head-dress. Girls braid their hair in a much greater
number of tresses than the matrons, and adorn the ends with ribbons or
coins. They sometimes interweave a quantity of horse-hair with their
own. Children wear no clothing whatever, until they are ten or twelve
years old.

These tribes, like most people who have no care about accumulating
wealth, are of an easy, indolent disposition, and spend much of their
time in amusement. During the long winter nights, the young people of
both sexes enjoy themselves with music and dancing. Their most common
instrument is a two-stringed lute. Their dancing consists more in the
motions of the hands than the feet.

The Calmucks are not, like some of the Tartar tribes, addicted to
drunkenness; but they occasionally have festivals, during which they
continue to drink for half a day without interruption. On these
occasions the young women place themselves by the men, and sing songs
of love, or war, or fabulous adventures.

The necessity of procuring fresh pasturage for their flocks, induces
frequent migrations among the Calmucks; and these occasions are
celebrated with a good deal of parade and festivity. The khan, whose
tents are carried before him, heads the procession, accompanied by the
princes on horseback. Women of any distinction have awnings over their
saddles, to protect them from the sun and rain.

The doctrines of Lamaism forbid polygamy; therefore the Calmucks, with
very few exceptions, have but one wife. The husband may, however,
put away his partner, and seek another, whenever it pleases him; and
the wife may do the same. Such separations are not uncommon. Princes
sometimes marry their half-sisters; but in general the Calmucks do not
wed within the fourth or fifth degree of relationship; and they very
rarely marry out of their own class.

When a young man has fixed his mind upon a girl, he sends to her
relations to make proposals. If these are accepted, the lover gives an
entertainment at the house of the bride’s parents, where the betrothal
is forthwith celebrated. In case of refusal, the young man sometimes
seizes the damsel and carries her off full speed. The parents cannot
reclaim their daughter, if he succeeds in getting her within his hut,
and preventing her escape until the next day; but this compulsory
proceeding does not release him from the obligation of paying the
accustomed price, in reindeer, camels, horses, or flocks.

When the terms are settled in a more amicable way, a magician is
consulted to ascertain what day will be most fortunate for the
nuptials; and sometimes the superstitious young couple are required to
wait several months. On the appointed day, the bridegroom erects a neat
new tent of white felt, very near the bride’s parents. Her relations
place her on horseback to be conducted to her husband; and custom
requires that she should offer some resistance to the proceeding. A
priest purifies the hut with incense and prayers, while the young
couple go out and squat beside each other on their heels, according
to the Tartar fashion. The priest comes forth, sits down cross-legged
before them, and repeats the usual prayer.

A dish of minced meat is offered the young couple, of which the man
eats three handfuls, but the woman refuses to partake. The caps of the
bridal pair are then thrown into the hut, and an entertainment begins,
which lasts till midnight. Before they separate, the married and
unmarried females have a contest together for the bride; the former,
who always gain the victory, arrange the girl’s head-dress after the
fashion of matrons.

In a few days, the bridal tent is taken down, and the husband removes
to his accustomed dwelling. During the two first years, the wife is not
allowed to visit her parents, unless upon some great emergency; and
then she must sit down outside of their hut, without presuming to enter
it. At the end of that period, she goes to see them, and is loaded with
presents.

Among one tribe of the Calmucks, called Soongas, marriages are
celebrated on horseback. The bride, mounted on a fleet horse, gallops
off at full speed; the lover pursues; and if he overtakes her, she is
carried to his hut, and becomes his wife without further ceremony,
except an entertainment to friends. If the damsel be disinclined to the
match, the lover seldom succeeds in overtaking her before they arrive
at the destined goal.

The Calmucks are, almost without exception, remarkably expert riders.
Even matrons of eighty years old will gallop twenty miles without
stopping, and children pursue the fleet-footed antelopes half a day,
upon their unshod horses.

If men think they have sufficient cause for jealousy, they sometimes
put their wives to death with their own hands; but if a woman should,
in a sudden fit of desperation, kill her husband, her nose and ears
would be cut off, and she would be sold for a slave. They have very
definite laws concerning marriages and marriage portions; and certain
punishments are appointed for those who attempt to break off a match.

The Buraits, on the frontiers of China, live in a manner very similar
to the other Tartars. They have in their huts images of wood, felt,
or tin, intended to represent good and evil spirits. The women are
not permitted to approach these images, or even to pass before them.
Polygamy is lawful among this tribe; and they take from one wife to
five, according to their means of support. A girl costs from five head
of cattle to one hundred; and the wealthy sometimes give five hundred.
The dowry given with the bride generally amounts to about one-fourth of
the price paid for her. A new tent is built for a wedding. Festivities
are kept up for five days, with singing, dancing, wrestling, and
horse-racing, and each day a horse is killed, to feast relations and
friends. Owing to the general contempt in which women are held, boys
treat their fathers with much more respect than their mothers. When a
woman dies, cooking utensils, a pipe, and a quantity of tobacco are
buried with her, for her use in another world, as bows and arrows are
always buried with the men.

The inhabitants of western Tartary differ very much in personal
appearance from the Mongul race; being generally well shaped,
with handsome features, and a Turkish cast of countenance. A large
proportion of them are Mohammedans. Many of them, having gathered into
large cities and villages, and acquired wealth, wear more elegant and
tasteful apparel, and are more civilized in their habits, than the
tribes previously described. The women are not handsome, but have a
fresh, healthy, modest look, which is very pleasing. They are extremely
frugal, industrious, and submissive. In some of the larger towns
there are schools for girls as well as boys; and though they probably
never learn any thing more than reading and writing, these are rare
advantages for the women of Asia. Among the Tartars, as among other
eastern nations, married women are generally better dressed than girls.
All the expense bestowed upon the latter would be a loss to the father
when his daughters were sold, exchanged, or bestowed in marriage; but
the finery of wives is a perpetual credit to the wealth and generosity
of their husbands. Almost all the Tartars are great admirers of scarlet
garments, and all share the oriental taste for ornaments. The rich have
their foreheads covered with a net-work of pearls, in lieu of which the
poor wear glass beads. The married women fasten to the back of their
jewelled-covered caps a piece of gay brocaded silk, adorned with pearls
or beads, which hangs down nearly to the end of their robes. Some
of the tribes stain their nails red, and their eyebrows black. They
seldom appear before strangers without a veil. Dr. Clarke’s servant,
perceiving that the Tartar women of the Casan always covered their
faces, and ran away at his approach, thought it polite to save them the
trouble, by putting his hands to his own face, and getting out of their
way as quick as possible. This excited female curiosity. The next time
they met him, they partially removed their veils; and he, as in duty
bound, ran the faster. At last they fairly hunted him in troops, with
their veils off, impatient to see the man who thus hid his face at the
approach of a woman.

Even the poorest habitations are divided into two parts; and the most
intimate friend would give deadly offence, if he were to enter the
dwellings appropriated to the female members of the family. Where
there are several wives, each one has a separate set of apartments.
The houses are generally very clean, being often whitewashed, and the
floors well covered with neat mats and carpets. The rich sometimes have
handsome Turkish sofas with damask canopies.

Wives are purchased at various sums, from twenty to five hundred
rubles, in money or flocks, according to beauty and other advantages.
Among some of the pastoral tribes a good healthy girl may be obtained
for two or three rubles. Their numbers are regulated by the same laws
that prevail in other Mohammedan countries; and, as usual, the poorer
classes seldom have more than one wife. But when the first grows old,
or ceases to please, they take a second. Merchants who are obliged to
travel a good deal, generally maintain houses at various places, with
a wife at each.

The wedding ceremonies bear a general resemblance to those already
described. When the stipulated price has been paid, the priest, in the
presence of assembled friends, asks the young people if they will wed
one another, repeats a prayer, and bestows the nuptial blessing. Among
the Tartars of the Casan, all the female friends of the bride meet at
her father’s house the day previous to the marriage, and deplore with
her the approaching change in her condition, while two men sing songs
that treat of the happiness of married life.

The Katschinzes, when they wish for a bride, send an agent to the
girl’s father, to present him with brandy and a pipe of tobacco,
and retire instantly without speaking. If, when he returns sometime
afterward, the presents remain untouched, it is a refusal; but if one
has been drank and the other smoked, it is acceptance. At the end of
six months, the lover himself comes to repeat the same ceremony; the
price is stipulated, and the wedding appointed. Sometimes several
months elapse, before a day deemed sufficiently lucky arrives; but
however long the probation may be, the young people must not indulge
in any thing like courtship. A girl would be disgraced, if she were to
give her intended husband the slightest reason to suppose she preferred
him to any other man.

When a young man is too poor to purchase a bride, he often agrees to
serve her father four or five years. If a richer or more fortunate
rival present himself before the term of service expires, the first
suitor can merely demand wages for his work. If the girl dies in the
mean time, the bargain is transferred to her sister; and if she had no
sister, the lover loses his labor. If the intended bridegroom should
die, his future bride becomes one of his father’s wives.

But if none of these misfortunes occur, and the wedding takes place,
the bride must never see her father-in-law after the day of the
marriage; should she chance to meet him, she must fall on the ground
and conceal her face till he has passed. Her other relatives visit her
when they please. In case of any dissatisfaction, the husband sends his
wife back to her parents, and retains the children as his property.

A Baschkir girl, before marriage, takes formal leave of all the females
of the hamlet, and afterward of the milk vessel from which she has been
fed since infancy; this memorial of childhood is embraced with many
tears. When the priest unites the young couple, he gives the husband an
arrow, saying: “Be bold; support and protect thy wife.” The bridegroom
conducts her to his hut, and a woman goes before them proclaiming aloud
the portion of the bride. When the bride enters her husband’s dwelling,
she kneels down before his nearest relations. The festivities continue
three days.

Among the Yakutes, it is customary for the bridegroom to remain with
his father-in-law several days after the wedding, and entertain his
friends there. When his wife is conducted to her new habitation, she
is led by female relatives, her own face being closely covered with
ermine. The door is barred by a slender piece of wood, which she pushes
against and breaks. When she has entered, seven small sticks with bits
of butter are put into her hands, and she throws them in the fire,
while the priest pronounces a blessing. On this occasion, feasts are
again given for two days to relations and friends.

Married women of this tribe wear an odd kind of cap, made of the skin
of some animal, in such a manner that the ears stand upright and
resemble horns.

The Yakutes and Baschkirs, unlike most of the neighboring nations and
tribes, always consult the inclinations of their daughters, before they
agree to a marriage contract. Where there is more than one wife, the
first, provided she has borne children, always retains a certain degree
of pre-eminence over the others. When a husband dies, such of his wives
as have had no children return to their parents, with the clothes and
presents they have received; if they have no paternal home, they can
remain subordinate to the oldest wife, and are entitled to a tenth part
of the cattle.

The occupations of the wealthy classes are similar to those of other
Asiatic women of rank. The love of smoking is universal. Tartar women,
besides cooking, tending their children, making garments, and milking
the flocks, tan the skins of water-fowl, with the feathers on, for
caps and other articles; weave cloth from common nettles; spin cotton
of extraordinary fineness; make felt coverings for the tents; dye
cloth; tan leather by means of sour milk and chalk; and manufacture
water-bottles, as transparent as horn, from the hides of horses and
camels. While they are busy at these various avocations, the men take
care of the flocks, hunt, fish, or lie stretched at their ease beside
the kumiss bottle.

Few Tartars marry more than one wife. They seldom take a second while
they live in peace with the first. They expend a great deal in wedding
entertainments; even the peasantry sometimes lavish a thousand roubles
on such occasions. The higher classes will never bestow a younger
daughter in marriage before the elder is disposed of, though a much
higher price should be offered for the junior sister. When a murza,
or Tartar noble, enters the apartments of his women, they all rise up
respectfully, and repeat the same ceremony when he leaves the room,
though he may come and go very frequently. Very aged women are, by
permission, excused from this inconvenient homage, on account of their
infirmities.

But though the women are kept in a state of such complete subjection,
personal abuse is considered very dishonorable, and the Tartars are
seldom guilty of it. In case of ill usage, a wife may complain to
magistrates, who, attended by some of the principal people of the
village, go to the house, pronounce a formal divorce, and give the
woman permission to return to her own relations.

Tartar mothers nurse their infants till they are two or three years
old, and think Christian women very cruel to wean them so early.

There is little variety in amusements. The men and women generally
have separate dances. Those of the men are lively and martial; but
the female dances consist principally in slow motions and changing
attitudes, while the face is covered by the hands. The women in general
have no share in the amusements of men; because this could not be
without violating Mohammedan ideas of decorum. The day when any tribe
removes to fresh pastures is always a day of festivity. The women, sure
of being seen by all the men, decorate themselves in their best style,
and put on all their store of ornaments.

The Mohammedan Tartars often make war on their neighbors, for the
purpose of obtaining slaves to sell. They frequently steal children for
this purpose; and if their own daughters are beautiful, or their wives
give them the least offence, they do not hesitate to sell them to the
Jewish slave merchants, who are always traversing the country.

In former times nearly the whole of Asia was tributary to the powerful
Mogul empire. Traces of ancient wealth and refinement are occasionally
dug up from the ruins of edifices built by Zinghis Khan and Tamerlane.
In 1720, there were found, in Calmuck Tartary, urns, lamps, ear-rings,
an equestrian statue, the image of a prince wearing a diadem, and two
women seated on thrones. It is said the Mogul women sometimes inherited
the crown, but always issued their decrees from behind a screen. They
were sometimes admitted to the apartments of men after supper, where
they conversed and partook of the refreshments offered them. On such
occasions they always remained veiled, and the slightest rudeness
toward them would have been revenged even unto death. When present
at any public entertainments, the Mogul women were screened from
observation by galleries of close lattice-work.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Amazons, so famed in history, are supposed to have lived on the
borders of the Black sea. They are said to have formed a state from
which men were entirely excluded, to have founded cities, and conquered
nations. They are represented armed with bows, arrows, javelins, and
a peculiar kind of axe, called “the axe of the Amazons.” Some ancient
writers dispute the existence of this female empire; but the monuments
and coins on which Amazons are represented are too numerous to admit
a doubt that there was some foundation for the story. That it was
a nation without men is highly improbable. The women were probably
warlike, and perhaps fought battles in squadrons, separate from their
husbands and brothers. Among some of the Tartar tribes of the present
day, females manage a horse, hurl a javelin, hunt wild animals, and
fight an enemy, as well as the men.

The women of Siberia are in a state of the most abject slavery. Brides
are bought with money, cattle, or clothing, and their numbers depend on
the wealth of the purchaser. The tribe called Tchuwasches offer honey
and bread to the sun, and to other deities, at the time the marriage
contract is settled. On the wedding day, the bride hides herself
behind a screen until the guests are assembled; she then walks slowly
three times round the room, preceded by young girls who carry beer,
honey, and bread. The bridegroom enters, snatches off her veil, kisses
her, and exchanges rings with her. She then hands refreshments to the
assembled guests, who hail her as _the betrothed girl_. After this, she
again retires behind the screen, where the married women assist her in
putting on the matron’s cap, which is much more ornamented than the
head-dress worn by maidens. After all have partaken of a feast, the
new wife pulls off her husband’s boots, in token of subservience to
him. The festivities continue for two days; and at parting the guests
generally deposit some coin in a loaf of bread, hollowed out for the
purpose.

It is considered a wife’s duty to obey the most capricious and
unreasonable commands of her husband, without one word of expostulation
or inquiry. If her master be dissatisfied with the most trifling
particular in her conduct, he tears the cap or veil from her head, and
this constitutes a divorce. The complexion of these people is generally
extremely pale, owing probably to their wretched fare.

The marriage ceremonies of the Tcheremisses are almost precisely
similar to those just described. The morning after a wedding, a man,
who represents the father of the bride, delivers the husband a whip,
which is very freely used whenever his wife offends him. They have
sacred groves, where the ceremonials of pagan worship are performed.
Women are not allowed to approach these places, and men must bathe
before they enter. The mead, cakes, and beer, offered to their gods
must be prepared by virgins. At the return of vegetation in the spring,
a great sacrifice is offered to their deities, accompanied by a feast;
this is the only occasion, on which the women and children are allowed
to eat with their husbands and fathers.

Among the Morduans, when the stipulated price has been paid, the father
of the bridegroom leads away the bride, who, closely veiled, departs
from the parental roof with many tears. On reaching the bridegroom’s
dwelling, her future spouse, pulling his cap over his eyes, sits down
with her to table. His father takes a cake three feet long, prepared
for the occasion, and putting one end of it under the bride’s veil,
says, “Behold the light. Mayst thou be happy in bread and children!”
After this ceremony, the young man is, for the first time, permitted
to see the woman whom his father has chosen for him. The day is spent
in dancing, singing, feasting, and drinking; at the close of which the
bride is placed on a mat and carried to the bridegroom, to whom she is
consigned with these words: “There, wolf, take thy lamb.”

The Wotyake fathers go to the house of their sons-in-law, soon after
the wedding, with a portion of the dowry they had promised; they take
the bride back to the parental home, where she remains for a few
months, sometimes a year. During this time, she lays aside the matron
dress she had assumed, and works partly for her parents, partly for
herself. When her husband comes to claim her again, she shows the same
reluctance to accompany him, that she did at first. These women are
very modest, virtuous, and industrious.

The Ostiaks generally make a great many visits to a girl’s father,
before her price is settled; and each time a strong effort is made to
abate the sum, so as to get as cheap a bargain as possible. The price
varies from ten to one hundred reindeer; but the bride usually brings
some dowry to her husband. As soon as the young man has paid half the
price they have agreed upon, he comes to the hut and takes up his
abode there. If he likes the girl, who without further ceremony is
considered his wife, he is bound to give her mother a reindeer; but if
he has cause for dissatisfaction, she is obliged to give him one. The
husband cannot take his wife to his own hut, or beat her without her
father’s permission, until the whole of her price is paid. On payment
of the second installment, a wedding feast is given, and the company
divert themselves with singing, dancing, and stories of love or war.
The men and women dance together, in couples, with a variety of amorous
gestures.

The Tungusians are the prettiest women in Siberia, and the men are
the best archers. Some of them tattoo lines, curves, and figures on
various parts of the face. It is done by drawing threads, blackened
with soot, under the skin. The threads are soon withdrawn, but when
the violent inflammation subsides, dark blue marks appear, which are
never afterward erased. This painful operation is performed on children
from six to ten years old. A wife is bought for a few reindeer, but
not even the simple and universal ceremony of a feast takes place in
commemoration of the event.

The Samoyedes have such squat figures, large heads, small eyes, flat
noses, and wide mouths, that some old travellers described them as
human beings with dogs’ heads. The women are said to be somewhat less
ugly than the men. A Samoyede has as many wives as he can furnish
reindeer to pay for; but no ceremonies of any kind consecrate their
marriages.

The Tchuktchi are among the wildest of the Siberians. They consider it
wrong and disgraceful to rob or murder one of their own tribe; but such
actions are regarded as honorable, and even glorious, when committed
upon the members of any other tribe. This is a good commentary on
Christian and enlightened nations, who consider it a great sin to
make slaves of their own people, but regard the self-same action as
perfectly justifiable toward persons of different complexion. If savage
nations could write _our_ history, how ridiculous they might make us
appear by stating simple facts, without the varnish of sophistry with
which we are accustomed to conceal them!

But to return to the Tchuktchi; expertness in theft is considered
so honorable, that a girl who has not given some such proofs of her
abilities, stands a poor chance for a husband. These people, as well as
the Koraiks, have as many wives as they can buy. Those who are rich in
flocks often have one to tend each of their numerous herds. The poor
serve their intended father-in-law for a stipulated time, or carry off
some girl by force.

The men of Kamtschatka are an uncouth looking race; but when the women
are clean, they are said not to be altogether disagreeable. They have
black hair and eyes, a ruddy complexion, and small hands and feet. The
Kamtschadales take as many wives as they can, and abandon them whenever
they think proper.

The Siberians spend their time in hunting, fishing, smoking, drinking,
and bartering away their furs to Russian traders, by the light of a
brand, in a country covered with eternal snows. All the numerous and
toilsome domestic occupations fall upon the women. They build the
huts, tend the cattle, pack the sledges, harness the reindeer, weave
mats, baskets, and cloth, dye worsted for embroidery, tan hides, make
garments, cook the food, tend the children, and in some tribes catch
all the fish. Their husbands are savagely jealous; yet they would
consider it beneath their masculine dignity to reward the most virtuous
and industrious wife with a kind word, or even a kind look. Women
are not allowed to eat with men; and particular dainties, such as
reindeer’s head, they are never suffered to taste. Among many tribes
they seem to be regarded as impure, unholy beings. They must not
approach that portion of the hut which contains any sacred object; in
loading or unloading the sledges, they are not suffered to step across
the foot-marks of men or reindeer, but must go round the sledge; and
it is deemed necessary to purify by fumigation the places where they
have sat. When likely to become mothers their situation is peculiarly
deplorable; for they are then obliged to live on stale, half putrid
provisions, not being allowed to touch fresh food.

When boys commit any fault, mothers are often beaten for it in their
stead. Under these cruel circumstances, the love of offspring,
naturally so strong in the female heart, is entirely destroyed.
Wives deprecate becoming mothers, and use all the means within their
knowledge to destroy innocent beings, who, if they drew the breath of
existence, would only add to their cares and sufferings. They nurse
their infants for a very long time. When busy, they hang them up in a
sort of basket, while the older children tumble about on hay spread on
the ground. Their cabins are parted into small divisions not unlike
cow stalls, and each mother has her separate establishment. It is not
unusual to see Samoyede women mothers at eleven years old, although
they inhabit an intensely cold climate, on the very borders of the
Frozen ocean.

Throughout Siberia it is a common thing for a man who is too poor
to buy a wife, and too lazy to work for one, to seize and carry
off by main force the first woman he meets; indeed this is not a
rare occurrence among any tribes where wives are purchased. If the
depredator be overtaken, he is likely to receive a sound drubbing;
but if he secures the prize within his hut, he can make much cheaper
arrangements with the parents, than he could under other circumstances.

The Siberian women are remarkably stupid and listless. In general they
seem to be alive to no other emotion than fear of the cudgel. Yet,
even in the rudest tribes, there are individuals who care enough about
personal attractions to paint their faces red and white, or tattoo the
face, neck, and arms in whimsical patterns. The Tchuktchi women, who
wear merely trowsers and robes of dog-skin, or reindeer’s skin, with
the hair outside, leave one half of the breast uncovered, tattoo the
arms, and almost always contrive to have some kind of ear-rings and
necklaces.

The Kamtschadale women used to wear feather caps in winter, and wooden
hats in summer; but Russian caps are now in general use; and commerce
has made them so luxurious that a few of the rich paint their faces,
wear garments of costly fur, with silk stockings and morocco shoes.

Most of the Siberian women wear bark shoes, and wrap up their ankles
in rags, until they resemble stumps. Tribes in the vicinity of trading
stations are comparatively well supplied with the necessaries and
conveniences of life, and the women are less stupid and indifferent.
Their dress is sometimes not altogether devoid of taste, and even
elegance. Their garments are neatly made, all the borders and seams
being embroidered with colored worsted. Their birch bark caps are
adorned with coral, beads, shells, coins, or small plates of metal.
Suspended behind these gay head-dresses are loose floating bands, or
festoons of beads; and sometimes from each shoulder hangs a long strip
of yellow leather or cloth, adorned with little brass images of horses,
reindeer, and fish. Some hang from their girdles a collection of
tassels, thimbles, buttons, and other trinkets, which make an incessant
jingling when they walk. Indeed one of the smarter sort of Siberian
women, in what she considers full dress, carries decorations that would
be quite too heavy to caparison a horse.

The Siberians have various uncouth pantomimic dances. Those in which
the women are allowed to join, are generally of an amorous character,
and not remarkably decorous. Cleanliness either in their persons, food,
or garments, is a rare virtue among these tribes; some are filthy
beyond description.

The shamans of Siberia are priests, physicians, and sorcerers. Children
of extremely irritable nerves are usually chosen for this profession,
the duties of which are fatiguing and often frightful. The poor
creatures are made to drink intoxicating liquors, and early have their
imaginations filled with an idea of the awful supernatural power they
are destined to receive from evil spirits. These preparations induce
paroxysms of frenzy, during which their words and actions are supposed
to be inspired. Women, from their liability to nervous disorders, are
often chosen for this purpose. The parents of such debilitated girls
make money by the superstitions of people who come to consult them, and
to purchase little images as a protection against malignant spirits.
These unfortunate beings often lead an existence full of terror,
laboring under great bodily weakness, and fully believing themselves
under the influence of the evil one; some of them, however, are artful,
and enjoy the power which they know to be a mere mockery. They wear the
horns of animals, stuffed serpents, eagles’ claws, and all manner of
fantastic things, to give them an awful appearance.

When the Siberians remove to a new place of residence, the women
sometimes walk on snow-shoes, and sometimes ride the reindeer. The
Kamtschadale women travel in sledges, but are obliged to have some man
with them, to guide the unruly dogs.

              [Illustration: A Mohammedan woman riding.]


FOOTNOTES:

[1] A light boat.

[2] An instrument with eight strings.

[3] Light wagons.

[4] The Hindoo word for harem.

[5] Certain sacred books.

[6] A widow who voluntarily immolates herself.




                    [Illustration: Girl of Timor.]




                           ASIATIC ISLANDS.


The prevailing customs in Ceylon are similar to those of India. They
are divided into distinct castes, from the nobleman to the weaver of
mats; the children follow the same business as their fathers; and it
is not allowable for one tribe to marry into another. The people in
general labor hard, and subsist on a little rice and salt. One of their
principal ceremonies of marriage, consists in tying the garments of the
bride and bridegroom together, in token that they are bound together
for life. This is solemnized in the presence of friends and relations,
with such festivities as the wealth of the parties admit.

In many of the islands of the Eastern Archipelago, the condition of
women is far better than it is on the continent of Asia. They are
not shut up within the walls of a harem, but are allowed to eat with
the men, and associate with them on terms of equality. Foreigners
are freely introduced to them, and they sometimes attend the parties
given by English and Dutch residents, where they uniformly behave with
modesty and propriety.

Before the introduction of Mohammedanism into Java, women often held
the highest offices of government; and when the chief of a district
dies, it is even now not uncommon for the widow to retain the authority
that belonged to her deceased husband. Polygamy is permitted by
religion and law, but the common people seldom have more than one
wife. The sovereign of Java does not by custom have more than four,
nor the chiefs more than two; but they generally have a greater or
less number of mistresses. It is extremely easy to obtain divorces
and form new connections; but during the continuance of the relation,
the matrimonial vow is said in general to be faithfully observed. If
a woman is dissatisfied with her husband, she can obtain divorce by
paying a certain sum of money established by custom. The lower class
pay about twenty dollars, and the higher pay fifty. The husband can
refuse to consent, but he seldom does so, because it is considered
dishonorable to live with a reluctant companion. It is not uncommon
to see a woman who has divorced three or four husbands before she is
thirty years old. Some individuals change their mates ten or twelve
times. A man may at any time obtain separation by making suitable
provision for his wife’s support; and this is no difficult matter in a
country where food is very abundant, and shelter almost unnecessary.

The Javanese have very little of the Asiatic jealousy of women; but
when they believe themselves wronged, they pursue the offender with
the most implacable revenge. The prince of Madura, during times of
political commotion, sought refuge with his family on board a Dutch
ship. The captain, according to the custom of his country, greeted the
princess with a kiss. She screamed, and her husband immediately stabbed
him to the heart.

There are three kinds of marriages in Java. The first, which is most
common, is where the rank of the parties is equal, or the bridegroom
superior to the bride; the second is where the wife’s station is much
above that of the husband; and the third is a sort of half-marriage,
the offspring of which are not allowed to be upon an entire equality
with the other children. In the two first kinds of marriage, the
ceremonies are alike; but in the last there is no ceremony at all. The
first wife is always at the head of the family; on this account, no
father is willing to bestow his daughter upon a man of his own rank for
a second or third wife.

Girls are generally disposed of in marriage at a very early age. An
unmarried woman of twenty-two years old is almost unheard of in Java.

The wedding ceremonies are similar to those in neighboring countries.
The betrothment is arranged by relatives, and consists in the offering
and accepting of gifts.

A price is always paid by the bridegroom, in money, jewels, clothes,
buffaloes, or rice, according to his wealth. This is generally regarded
as a provision for the wife; but among some tribes, the money or
goods is given outright to the girl’s parents. On the wedding day,
the bridegroom, dressed in his richest attire, and mounted on his
best steed, proceeds to the bride’s dwelling, accompanied by his
friends with music. When they approach, she comes out to meet them,
and receives them with a low obeisance. In some districts they have a
frolicsome custom of throwing bundles of betel leaves at each other,
as soon as the bride appears at the door. If she receives a blow on
the forehead it is considered as a sign that she will have to obey
her husband; but if the reverse happens, it is supposed that she will
govern him. The bridegroom conducts his bride to a seat elevated above
the rest of the company, and in token of their intention to live
together, they eat siri (or betel leaves) from the same siri-box.
In some places they eat rice from the same vessel. The nuptials are
celebrated at the mosque, according to the Mohammedan ritual, and the
young couple move through the village in gay procession; the bride in
an open litter, decked with all the jewels she could buy or borrow,
and the bridegroom and his friends on horseback, with as much splendor
of appearance as their means will allow. They are always accompanied
by music, and sometimes a buffoon goes before them making ludicrous
gestures. They return to a feast at the bride’s parents’; and on the
fifth day after the marriage, a new procession is formed to escort them
to the house of the bridegroom’s father, where an entertainment is
prepared, and where they again eat siri from the same siri-box.

In some districts, the spinning wheel, loom, and various cooking
utensils, are carried in the bridal procession. Among some tribes in
the interior, it is customary for the bride to wash the bridegroom’s
feet, in token of subjection; in other places, he treads upon a raw
egg, which she wipes from his foot. In some parts of the island, when
a man marries a second or third wife, he approaches the bride with
a burning brand, on which she pours water from a vase. An English
traveller speaks of a widow, who, growing weary of this ceremony before
the brand was extinguished, threw the remainder of the water full in
her lover’s face. As first marriages are generally arranged by parents,
the second wife is more apt to be the object of real affection.

In Java the labor of women is estimated about as high as that of men;
and as they are generally industrious and frugal, they are quite
independent of the other sex. Children are not deserted or neglected,
as they are in many parts of Asia, because in Java it is very easy to
support them, and to employ them profitably. Among the poor, it is
common for the parents to drop their proper names on the birth of
their first child, especially if it be a son: if the babe, as often
happens, is called by such a name as The Handsome One, they are called
the Father and Mother of The Handsome One.

The birth of a child is celebrated by a feast of yellow rice, to which
the relations are invited; but the name is not conferred with any
religious ceremonies. A yearly festival is held in Java in honor of the
dead. On these occasions, men, women, and children, dressed in their
best clothing, repair to the burial-places and strew the tombs of their
parents with flowers consecrated to that purpose.

All the women in Java, from the princess to the peasant, weave and
make the garments worn by their families. Men are accustomed to
pride themselves on the beauty of the cloth woven by their wives and
daughters. In every part of the island women may be seen spinning and
weaving, on an elevated veranda in front of their bamboo cottages,
protected from the sun by a projection of the roof.

The Javanese are generally mild, respectful, and timid. They are said
to have a pensive look, and their demeanor is somewhat elegant and
insinuating. Women of the lower classes, being very much exposed to the
influence of an intensely hot climate, become extremely ugly in their
old age.

With regard to complexion, they consider a golden yellow as the
standard of perfection. One of their popular poets, describing a
graceful woman, says, “Her neck was yellow as gold, her gait was gentle
and majestic, like that of an elephant.” The Javanese have naturally
very fine teeth, but they used to consider it a disgrace to let them
remain “white, like a dog’s;” and at eight or nine years old, they
were filed and died indelibly black, with a preparation made of burnt
cocoa-nut. This is a painful operation, but was formerly considered so
necessary, that when they wished to say a girl was past her childhood,
they expressed it by saying, “She has had her teeth filed.” Some people
of fantastic taste had them filed so as to resemble a saw. But Sir
Stamford Raffles says the custom of filing the teeth in any way is now
nearly out of fashion in Java.

They spoil their mouths, which are usually handsome, by the use of
betel and tobacco. Both men and women take pride in a beautiful head
of hair, which they perfume with fragrant oils. The women fasten it in
a knot at the back of the head, and when in full dress they interweave
it with an enormous mass of flowers, and wear wreaths suspended from
the ears. The Indian islanders are extremely fond of flowers; it is an
epithet they always apply to express beautiful things.

When the Javanese wish to appear particularly fascinating, they stain
the face, neck, and arms with a yellow cosmetic obtained from perfumed
flowers.

The sovereign keeps a select band of beautiful dancers for the
amusement of the royal household. These females are the only persons
that are allowed to perform the _s’rimpi_,--a slow, modest, and
exceedingly graceful dance, resembling a minuet by four persons. At the
beginning and end of the dance, the performers raise their clasped
hands to their foreheads, and bend reverentially toward the prince.
None but very young girls belong to this band, and they leave it as
soon as they become mothers.

Javanese women of high rank dress in a manner exceedingly tasteful and
magnificent. They wear full flowing robes of delicate silk, of green or
other colors, stamped with golden flowers; their girdles are composed
of plates of gold, clasped with diamonds; while armlets, bracelets, and
tiaras are richly chased and studded with gems.

The public class of dancers, called _rong-gengs_, are similar to their
frail sisters of Hindostan in dress and deportment. But notwithstanding
their profligacy, those who acquire considerable fortune frequently
marry men much superior to themselves in rank. Their songs are very
comic, and they are sometimes accompanied by a buffoon, who excites
laughter by a ludicrous imitation of all their movements. The Javanese
dances have the same characteristics, which distinguish that amusement
in various parts of Asia. They consist principally in graceful
attitudes, and slow movements of the limbs, even to distinct motions of
the hands and fingers. Men often join in these dances, but no females,
except professional dancers, ever perform before strangers.

The women of Java are very fond of a peculiar kind of amusement called
_sintren_. A little boy or girl, richly dressed, is put under a basket,
and music and song burst forth, while all the spectators clap their
hands to keep time. The basket soon begins to move; in a short time
the child rises--dances in a wild but graceful manner--seems to sink
exhausted into slumber--and awakes apparently unconscious of all that
has happened. The charm consists in the idea that the whole soul is
fascinated, and led unawares by the power of music.

The women of this island do not go with the upper part of the person
uncovered, as they do in the southern parts of the peninsula.

The Javanese are exceedingly superstitious. Their fears are easily
excited by dreams and bad omens, and they are great believers in old
women endowed with supernatural powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sumatra is less advanced in civilization than Java, and is inhabited
by various tribes of different origin. The Battas are an irritable
and warlike tribe. They take as many wives as they please, and seldom
have less than five or six. The women live in the same apartment with
their husband; the room has no partitions, but each wife has a separate
fireplace. As the bridegroom always makes a present of buffaloes, or
horses, to the parents of the bride, daughters are considered a source
of wealth. The women do all the work, while their husbands lounge in
idleness, playing on the flute, with wreaths of globe-amaranth around
their heads; or racing with each other, without saddle or stirrups,
or hunting deer, or gambling away their wives, their children, and
themselves. The Battas consider their wives and children as slaves, and
sell them whenever they choose. An unfaithful wife has her hair cut
off, and is sold for a slave; the paramour is killed and eaten by her
husband’s tribe.

On festival occasions, the girls wear gold pendants in their ears, and
fasten their hair with golden pins, having heads in the shape of birds
or dragons. They likewise give a beautiful polish to large shells, of
which they make bracelets. Their dress covers the person modestly.

More is known of the Redjangs than of any other tribe in Sumatra. They
are a small, well-formed race, with deep olive complexion, and hair of
shining blackness, owing partly to the cocoa-nut oil with which they
constantly anoint it. The women are very proud of long hair, which they
roll up tastefully on the crown of the head. They are fond of wearing
garlands, which are generally composed of white, or light yellow,
flowers. In some districts the girls wear fillets half an inch broad
around their foreheads; the poor have them made of the leaves of the
nipah-palm, but the rich wear silver and gold.

The Redjangs have the absurd custom of stretching the ears, flattening
the noses, and compressing the heads of new-born infants. They let the
nails of the middle and little finger grow to an extraordinary length.
The tips of the fingers are stained with the red juice of henna; and it
is singular that their hands are always cold to the touch.

Their common garments are generally made of the bark of the
paper-mulberry tree, prepared in a manner similar to Otaheite cloth.

The women in general are very ugly, but some of them are remarkably
handsome; especially among the higher classes, who are not necessarily
exposed to the influence of the sun. A Sumatran woman is considered old
at thirty, and decrepit at forty. The same custom with regard to names
prevails here as in Java. If a child is named Ladin, the parents are
called the Father and Mother of Ladin. It is a custom with them never
to speak their own name; if a stranger inquires what it is, they ask
another person to tell it.

The Redjangs manifest a degree of delicacy toward women, which one
would not expect from a people half civilized. Virtue and modesty are
held in high estimation, and as a natural consequence the opposite
vices are rare. If an unmarried woman disgraces herself, her father
and lover are both fined; if unable to pay, she is sold for a slave.
A dishonored husband seldom seeks redress by a legal process; he is
either silent, or revenges his own wrongs. Girls are seldom trusted
from the presence of their mothers; but at public festivals, in the
town hall, young people meet to dance and sing. If a young man takes
a fancy to any of the assembly, he generally sends some elderly woman
with presents to the damsel. Her parents then interfere, and if they
consider the match a suitable one, the preliminaries are soon settled.
There are three different kinds of marriage among the Redjangs. By
the first mode, the husband purchases his wife for a given sum, and
she becomes his slave, to all intents and purposes. In this case,
a man is allowed to have as many wives as he can buy and maintain.
This marriage, which is called marriage by _jourjour_, is in most
cases modified by a custom, which enables the parents of the bride to
reconcile their avarice with affection. A part of the price of their
daughter remains unpaid, and is called _tali koulo_, or the bond of
friendship. While this sum, however small, remains due, the woman is
not the slave of her husband; he cannot sell her, or abuse her with
impunity, and she is at liberty to seek a divorce from him when she
pleases. When families are upon good terms, a portion of the _jourjour_
often remains unpaid for several generations; and some men are quite
rich from the sums due to them for daughters, sisters, aunts, and
grand-aunts. These are regarded as debts of honor, and are very seldom
lost. Where the whole _jourjour_ is paid and received during the
lifetime of a woman, she is completely in the power of her husband; her
only privilege is, that he is obliged to sell her to her relations,
if they offer as high a price as he can obtain elsewhere. But these
connections are very rarely formed without the _tali koulo_, or bond of
friendship.

The second kind of marriage is called marriage by _ambelanack_. In this
case the husband is adopted by the bride’s father, remains with him,
works under his authority, and both parents and children are considered
as the property of the head of the family. A man who is married in
this way cannot take another wife, without the consent of his adopted
father; but if he acquires, either by industry or inheritance, a sum
sufficient to pay the expenses attendant upon other forms of marriage,
he can at any time secure to himself and wife the privileges belonging
to them.

By the third mode, the husband gives and receives a sum of money, and
the wife is on a perfect equality with him. This is called marriage by
_simando_, and takes place less frequently than the other forms. In
this case, a second wife cannot be taken without divorcing the first,
and giving her half the fortune; but if the wife herself seeks the
separation, she loses her right to half the property, and can only
receive her original dowry.

The various regulations connected with these different forms of
marriage, and consecrated by custom only, are carefully observed.

The wedding ceremonies are very simple. The father of one of the
parties, or the chief of the village, joins their hands and pronounces
them husband and wife. An _iman_ performs this office for those who are
Mohammedans. A bamboo broken in the presence of the parties and their
relations constitutes a divorce.

The Redjangs are gentle, patient, polite, and serious. They bathe
frequently, but never wash their garments.

The Lampongs, who reside in the south part of Sumatra, are
distinguished by a complexion lighter than the other tribes. In the
shape of their faces, and the form of their eyes, they resemble the
Chinese. The tallest and handsomest women of the island belong to this
tribe. Their manners are much more free than the Redjangs, and they are
less scrupulous about the character of their wives and daughters. It
is a common thing to see a young girl sitting out of doors, perfuming
and arranging her lover’s hair, while he lays his head in her lap,
and looks up affectionately in her face. They generally marry by
_jourjour_, and the bride is always protected by the _tali koulo_, or
bond of friendship. Marriages by _simando_ are very rare. At festivals,
a young man is appointed to select the couples that shall dance
together. On these occasions both men and women use perfumed ointments,
and paint their faces in fantastic style.

The Sumatrans have naturally very perfect teeth, but they grind them
away almost to the gums, or file them to a point, and dye them jet
black. The wealthy have the teeth of the lower jaw covered with gold
plate, so as to produce a rich contrast with the upper ones. Those who
cannot afford this, leave one or two white, by way of contrast. A feast
is given by the family whenever a child has its ears pierced and teeth
filed. Women do not carry infants in their arms, but sitting astride on
the hip, supported by a cloth which is tied on the opposite shoulder.
Their cradles are made to swing from the ceiling, like those of the
Hindoos.

       *       *       *       *       *

Very little is known concerning the social condition of Borneo. It
contains various tribes, similar to each other in person and manners.
The women of the Biadjos are said to be tall and handsome. Their only
clothing is a strip of cloth about the waist, and they are accustomed
to paint their bodies blue. They hang weights to their ears, about as
large as a crown-piece, which stretches them to an immoderate length.
They plate their teeth with gold, and wear necklaces of tigers’ teeth.

No man is allowed to solicit a damsel in marriage until he has cut
off the head of an enemy. When this condition is fulfilled the lover
makes presents to his mistress; if they are accepted, an entertainment
is given by her parents, and on the ensuing day by his parents. After
the feast, the bridegroom is conducted home to the house of the bride.
At the door, a friend sprinkles him with the blood of a cock, and her
with the blood of a hen; the parties then give each other their bloody
hands, and from that time they live together. If the blood of the fowls
spirts too far, it is deemed an unlucky sign. If a man loses his wife,
he cannot marry a second, till he cuts off the head of another enemy.
If his wife conducts herself improperly, he gives her a sound beating.

On the sea-coast of Borneo fleets of boats may be seen laden with
provisions brought to market by the women, who are screened from the
sun by huge bamboo hats. These women are small and rather pretty.
In complexion they are about as dark as mulattoes. They walk with a
firm step, and turn their toes out, which is an unusual thing among
the oriental nations. Wives are bought, and marriages performed with
great ceremony; generally before the bride is eleven years old. Public
opinion is by no means rigid concerning the character of unmarried
females; but the subject is viewed differently when they have husbands.

       *       *       *       *       *

The natives of Celebes are of a light olive complexion, with glossy
black hair, that falls in ringlets over the neck and shoulders. Men
adorn their hair with jewels; but women merely wear gold chains about
the neck. They color their nails red, and their teeth black, and take
great pains to flatten the noses of their infants.

The husband receives no other dowry with his wife than the presents
she obtains before the ceremony. As soon as the young couple are
married, they are shut up in an apartment by themselves for three
days; a servant brings them necessary food, while their friends are
entertained with great merriment by the bride’s father. At the end
of this time they are liberated, receive congratulations, and are
conducted to their future home. The women of Celebes are distinguished
for virtue and modesty. They take an active part in business, and are
frequently raised to the throne, though the government is elective. At
public festivals they appear freely among men, and those in authority
discuss affairs of state in their councils. In token of equality, the
husband and wife always eat from the same dish; he from the right
side, and she from the left. The wife of the chief of Lipukaski was
considered one of the first politicians in Celebes. One day she rode
out among the warriors of her tribe, and upbraiding them with tardiness
in giving battle, she demanded a spear, that she might herself give
them an example. Stimulated by her reproof, they went forth and gained
the victory. This woman was said to have a countenance expressive
of great intelligence and firmness. In many parts of the Eastern
Archipelago women have been intrusted with sovereign power; and it is
singular that this occurs most frequently where the government is most
turbulent. The passion for gaming, so common in the other islands,
prevails in Celebes. Wives, children, and personal freedom are often
staked, and quarrels arise which occasion deadly hostility between
families. The fine demanded by law is twenty dollars for the murder of
a man, and thirty for a woman. The women of Celebes, and of the other
Molucca islands, wear hats of prodigious size, six or seven feet in
diameter. Infants are plentifully rubbed with oil, and boys are never
nursed longer than a year, from the idea that it would injure their
understandings.

       *       *       *       *       *

In Amboyna, as in almost every part of the East, a man purchases a
bride by a certain sum of money given to the parents. They have an
unbounded admiration for very young girls, and a great abhorrence of
old women. The girls are not often trusted away from their mothers;
but courtship is carried on by means of nosegays, or plates of fruit,
mutually exchanged, and arranged in such a manner as to signify the
various degrees of love or disapprobation.

In some of the neighboring islands, when a young man is too bashful to
speak his love, he seizes the first opportunity he can find of sitting
near the object of his affection, and tying his garment to hers. If she
allows him to finish the knot, and neither cuts nor loosens it, she
thereby gives her consent to the marriage. If she merely loosens it, he
is at liberty to try his luck again, at a more propitious moment; but
if she cuts it, there is an end of hope.

       *       *       *       *       *

The customs of the island of Bali greatly resemble those of the
Hindoos. Widows sacrifice themselves on the funeral pile of their
husbands in great numbers. When the king dies, all his wives and
mistresses devote themselves to the flames; and when the queen dies,
great numbers of her female slaves are stabbed with daggers, and
thrown upon the pile. This death is considered so honorable that it
is generally eagerly contended for; and if it happen that a request
to be sacrificed is for any reason refused, it is mourned over as an
irretrievable disgrace. Individuals who have been thus denied, as
well as those who, being selected, are reluctant to become victims,
are forever after imprisoned. If they find means to escape, the first
person that meets them may dispatch them with a dagger, and cast their
bodies into the streets. At the funeral of the king’s son, one of his
wives, who was very young, asked her father whether, as she had been
married only three months, it was her duty to sacrifice herself. The
parent, steeled by custom, urged the disgrace she would bring on her
family, and the poor girl sprung into the flames, where she was soon
consumed. It seldom happens that one of the laboring class devotes
herself in this way, and the sacred order never do; but it is almost
universal in the mercantile and military classes.

Wives are purchased; and if a young man cannot obtain the requisite
sum, he agrees to serve the father or guardian of the damsel, until
his labor defrays the debt. When his conduct is very satisfactory, the
parents often remit a portion of his services. Divorce is not allowed
in Bali. The women of this island disfigure their ears by enormously
extended apertures. They are frank and cheerful in their manners, and
enjoy a degree of consideration which seems remarkable where polygamy
prevails.

       *       *       *       *       *

The women of Timor have very delicate and graceful forms, dark brown
complexions, pleasing features, and black eyes full of vivacity. They
consider corpulence a very great defect.

When a new king begins his reign they sacrifice a young female slave,
adorned with jewels and flowers, by exposing her on the water’s edge
until the crocodiles come and devour her. This is done on account of a
tradition that the royal family descended from crocodiles.

The natives of this island chew betel and gild their front teeth.
In general, both men and women let the hair flow loosely over their
shoulders; but sometimes the wealthy fasten it with golden rings, or
arrange it in the Grecian style, fastened by gold pins with diamond
heads, or tortoise-shell combs inlaid with gold. They constantly
wash their hair with lye, and render it glossy with cocoa-nut oil.
The higher classes of females are seldom seen in public. They are
distinguished by golden bracelets, expensive coral necklaces, and
ornaments of copper-wire around their arms and ankles. They are
sometimes tattooed with figures representing flowers, made with an
instrument dipped in indigo. They spend their time in frequent bathing,
smoking, chewing betel, and sleeping, while slaves fan them to keep
away the insects. Sometimes they amuse themselves by making trifling
articles of rice straw, or leaves of the pandanus; but all occupation,
except light fanciful work, is left to the poorer classes. They pay
evening visits, drink tea together, and remain till late at night,
entertained with the dancing and singing of slaves, accompanied by the
Malay tambourine and the Chinese tamtam.

The ladies of Timor are extravagantly fond of perfumes. Their dress
is impregnated with the odor of sandal-wood and gum-benjamin, their
beds are strewed with fragrant flowers, and they often chew small
Chinese cakes, highly aromatic, which perfume the breath for a long
time. They likewise wear garlands about their head, neck, and arms.
Their love-letters are composed of flowers, and betel leaves folded in
different ways, according to the meaning they are intended to convey.
When a girl bestows a wreath taken from her own person, it is an open
avowal of affection.

Very little disgrace is attached to any indiscretions committed before
marriage. When parents are satisfied with the price offered for a
daughter, they cause animals to be killed and the entrails consulted
for omens, before the wedding takes place. The people of Timor take as
many wives as they can maintain, and sometimes sell their children in
order to purchase them. Here, as in Java, girls are considered a source
of wealth, because at their marriage parents are sure to receive a sum
of gold, or a certain number of cattle. So long as any part of the
price remains unpaid, they can take back their daughter without making
restitution, or they may claim her children as property.

       *       *       *       *       *

The inhabitants of New Guinea are frightfully ugly. Their skin is black
and rough; they color their hair a fiery red, and dress it like a huge
mop. Both men and women pass rings, sticks, and pieces of bone through
their noses, which render it difficult for them to breathe. While these
savages are lounging about, or chasing wild hogs, their women cut wood,
dig vegetables, and make pottery ware. The bachelors live in houses by
themselves, built apart from the other cabins.

       *       *       *       *       *

The natives of New Holland are nearly black, and but little more comely
than their neighbors of New Guinea. They go without clothing, and rub
themselves with fish oil, as a defence against musquitoes. They daub
their hair with yellow gum, in order to fasten ornaments of feathers,
fish-bones, and the tails of dogs. Both sexes have the back and arms
deeply scarred by an operation performed with pieces of broken shell.
Scarcely any woman has the two lower joints of the little finger; it is
not known whether this sacrifice is made in mourning for relatives, or
for some other reason. Before a girl is given to her husband, her two
front teeth are knocked out. The _lover_ then throws a kangaroo skin
over her shoulders, spits in her face several times, marks her with
painted stripes of different colors, orders her to march to his hut
with his provision bag, and if she does not go fast enough to please
him, he gives her a few kicks by the way. These savages generally
steal wives from some tribe with whom they are at enmity. As soon as
they observe a girl without any protector near, they rush upon her,
stupefy her with blows of a club, and drag her through the woods with
the utmost violence. Her tribe retaliate merely by committing a similar
outrage. There are no wedding ceremonies. These wretched women spend
much of their time in fishing. They chew muscles and cockles, and drop
them in the water for bait. Their lines are made of fibres of bark,
and their hooks of mother-of-pearl oyster shells, rubbed on stones
till they assume the desired shape. They commonly beguile the time by
singing; but they never dance, though the men spend a great deal of
their time in that amusement.

A woman will often be out with two or three children, in a miserable
boat, on the very edge of a rolling surf, that would frighten even
an experienced mariner. If they have an infant, it lies across the
mother’s lap, without danger of falling; for while employed in fishing,
she sits in the bottom of the shallow boat, with her knees up to her
neck, and between the knees and the body her babe lies securely.

When the New Hollanders are displeased with their wives, they spear
them or knock them in the head. Neither men nor women appeared to
have any sense of modesty; but when they found that white people, who
visited the island, thought it indecent to go without clothing, the
women grew more reserved, and seemed desirous of conforming to their
ideas of propriety.

       *       *       *       *       *

The people of Van Diemen’s Land are in a state similar to that of New
Holland. They rub their hair with red ochre, and decorate it with
fish-bones and teeth. The dull black of their complexions is deepened
with powder of charcoal. They likewise tattoo themselves in lines or
points, which rise up in tubercles, of the same color as the rest of
the skin. The women dive into the sea for shell-fish and lobsters,
while their husbands sit by a fire cooking and eating the choicest
morsels they procure; they likewise hunt game, and cut all the fuel.
The men keep as many wives as they please, but treat them so badly,
that they seize every opportunity to run away and place themselves
under the protection of the British sailors, who come there to obtain
seals. They are much handsomer, and more cleanly, than the women of
New Holland, and are said to be remarkably kind and docile. Toward the
sailors, who protect them, they are most faithful and affectionate. If
a storm comes on while their mates are out engaged in the seal-fishery,
these tender-hearted creatures constantly endeavor to propitiate
the Good Spirit with songs, which they accompany with graceful and
supplicating gestures. They have such a dread of returning to the
power of their brutal husbands, that they are continually afraid the
sailors will go away and leave them. If they are so unfortunate as to
be seized by their tribe, they are treated most savagely, and their
half European children are thrown into the fire. These children are
said to be universally and remarkably beautiful. In their wild state
these women wear little or no clothing. Infants sit on the shoulders of
the mother, entwining their legs about her neck, and holding her fast
by the hair of her head. Being accustomed to this position, they take
care of themselves with great dexterity. The women may often be seen
at the fishing stations, pursuing their occupation with babes in this
apparently dangerous situation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Little is known of the interior of the Philippine islands. Some of
the native tribes who live in the mountains, wear only a small apron
made of the barks of trees. They are said to be friendly, cheerful,
and cleanly, with scrupulous ideas of modesty, both in married and
unmarried women. They purchase their wives. The simple bridal ceremony
is performed by a priestess, who sacrifices an animal on the occasion.
Manilla, the largest town of these islands, is principally occupied by
the descendants of Spanish and Chinese settlers. They are extremely
indolent; sleeping and smoking the whole day. Little children learn to
smoke before they can run alone; and women are so fond of cigars, that
they have them a foot long and thick in proportion. When they walk out
to take the evening air, whole parties of them may be seen, elegantly
dressed, with these great bales of tobacco burning in their mouths.
They likewise injure their teeth by chewing betel.

       *       *       *       *       *

The island of Loo Choo has been seldom visited by Europeans. Captain
Hall gives a most delightful picture of the honesty, kindness,
simplicity, and politeness of the inhabitants. All his efforts to
obtain a sight of the women of this island were fruitless. The natives
guarded them at every step, and always sent runners before them, to
give indication of their approach. Once, at a sudden turning of the
road, the English officers met two women; but they instantly threw the
baskets from their heads, and ran into the woods, in the utmost terror.
It appears, however, that they are not thus scrupulous about being seen
by their own countrymen; for by the help of a telescope, captain Hall
saw them coming from the country with baskets on their heads, beating
rice in wooden mortars, playing with dogs in the midst of a crowd of
people, and washing clothes in the river, after the East India fashion,
by dipping them in the stream, and then beating them on stones. Infants
are carried across the hip, as in India. The natives were unwilling to
speak of their women, and seemed distressed when questions were asked.
One of them said they were regarded as inferior beings, and not allowed
the use of fans, which are considered a great luxury in Loo Choo. But
their treatment of the English boatswain’s wife seemed to contradict
this statement; for it was not only kind and indulgent in the extreme,
but was tinged with something of respectful gallantry. On one occasion,
a Loo Choo lady visited the boatswain’s wife, when all the men were out
of the way. She wore loose floating robes, with a girdle tied at the
side, and had sandals on her feet. She was rather fair, with small dark
eyes, and shining black hair, fastened in a knot on one side of the
head. She seemed to be exceedingly timid. When captain Hall insisted
upon knowing why the natives were afraid to let them walk into the
village, one of the chiefs answered, in broken language: “Loo Choo
woman see Ingeree man, Loo Choo woman cry!”--meaning, “If a Loo Choo
woman should see an Englishman, she would cry.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The manners and customs in Japan, and the occupations of different
classes, are similar to those of China. In economy of time and labor
they rival even the Chinese; and unlike them they are scrupulously neat
in their habits. There is no end to their rules for the ceremonials
of behavior. They have whole volumes written to teach people how to
drink a glass of water, how to give or receive a present, how to salute
a superior, or an equal, &c. &c. Children, being early accustomed to
habits of thoughtful industry and punctilious civility, appear like
little old men and women, while they are yet infants. In this respect
they resemble their neighbors of China, among whom the boisterous mirth
of childhood is a thing almost unknown; perhaps the whole Celestial
Empire does not furnish a genuine specimen of a romping girl, or a
madcap, roguish boy. Implicit obedience to parents and superiors
prevails in Japan, to as great an extent as in China.

The houses in these islands are of simple construction, made of bamboo,
with apartments divided by movable partitions. The wealthy have a good
deal of painting, gilding, and rich japaning, about their walls and
furniture. Their soft floor mats serve both for seats and tables, and
chop-sticks of ivory or wood are used instead of knives and forks.
They have metal mirrors with handles, to be used at the toilet. The
fashion of their dress is the same for both sexes, and for all classes,
from the monarch to the poorest subject; and they say it has remained
unchanged for two thousand five hundred years. They wear long full
robes, like night-gowns, with sleeves so wide that they almost reach
the ground. These garments are cut round at the neck, without a collar,
leaving the throat and a small portion of the neck uncovered. The
women wear these robes so long that they trail on the ground. The
garments are fastened at the waist with a sash, which the married tie
in front, and the unmarried behind. Ladies of rank often have them made
of variegated silk, interwoven with flowers of silver or gold. They
sometimes wear thirty or forty at once; but they are of such delicate
texture, that the whole do not weigh more than three or four pounds.
Their shoes are made of rice straw. The Japanese complexion is yellow;
but women of distinction, being sheltered from the sun, are nearly as
white as Europeans. They appear in public when they please, either
attended by a servant with an umbrella, or rolled along in a sort
of ornamented wheelbarrow, with an awning over it. Whether in doors
or out, they always have fans in their hands. They have very black
hair, broad snubby noses, and small oblong eyes, which appear to be
constantly winking. All ranks and ages are remarkable for industry,
and it is said the women are generally characterized by an exemplary
observance of the domestic virtues. The emperor has but one wife, who
is styled empress, but he has several mistresses, who form a part of
the royal household, though subordinate to her in rank.

When a husband accuses his wife of infidelity, and she asserts that she
is guiltless, her oath is taken in writing, and laid on water; if it
swims she is esteemed innocent. This crime, like most others in Japan,
is punished with death.

The men of the Aleutian or Fox islands are glad in times of scarcity to
barter away a wife for a fish or a leather bottle full of train-oil.
Sometimes one woman lives with two husbands; and often leaves a second
or third to return to the first with all her children. These islanders
frequently exchange wives with each other, and have not the slightest
idea of any dishonor connected with the infamy of their women. Under
these circumstances, it is not wonderful that the females are destitute
of modesty.

The men of the Fox islands wear frocks neatly made of the skins of
birds, which look beautifully when the variegated feathers glisten in
the sunshine. The women wear the more homely covering of the ice-bear,
with the hairy side outward. They decorate these unwieldy robes with
strips of leather, covered with beads, shells, or sea-parrots’ bills.
The wing-bones of the sea-mew furnish them with needles, and seals’
nerves are used for thread. Rude as these implements are, their
workmanship is exceedingly curious and delicate. The women tattoo
themselves in such a manner, that they look as if they had mustaches.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Ainos, or native inhabitants of the Kurile islands, are modest
even to bashfulness. The men are very shy about allowing strangers to
hold any communication with their wives and daughters. Their tattooed
hands, swarthy faces, jet black hair hanging over their foreheads, and
lips stained blue, are not much calculated to excite the admiration
of those accustomed to civilized life. The Ainos, of both sexes, are
remarkable for the gentleness and strict honesty of their characters.

              [Illustration: Asiatic women baking bread.]




  [Illustration: Egyptian women bringing water for their conquerors.]




                                AFRICA.


It has been said Egypt was the first nation that became civilized,
and framed wise laws, by which they agreed to be governed. It had
reached the height of its grandeur, and was beginning to decay, while
nations which we call ancient were yet in their infancy. Moses, the
great lawgiver of the Jews, is said to have been learned in “all the
wisdom of the Egyptians.” Thebes, with its hundred gates and immense
population, was a subject of wonder and praise even in the days of
Homer. Solon and Herodotus, Pythagoras and Plato, travelled in Egypt to
witness her magnificent works of art, and gather from the far-famed
stores of her intellectual wealth.

Such was Egypt, long before Greece and Rome had existence! This early
civilization might be in part owing to the annual overflowing of the
Nile, which made it impossible for the inhabitants to subsist by
hunting and fishing, and thus compelled them to turn their attention to
agriculture. During the inundation of the river, they were obliged to
take shelter in houses raised on piles above the reach of the waters.
Men and women, being thus placed in each other’s society, naturally
endeavored to please each other, and female influence produced its
usual effect of softening the character, and rendering the manners more
polished and agreeable. From this union, music, poetry, and the fine
arts would naturally flow, as the stream from its parent fountain.

It is generally supposed that the Egyptians were a colony from
Ethiopia, and that their complexion was black. Herodotus, who travelled
in Egypt, distinctly states that they had “black skins and curly
hair.” Speaking of the tradition that two black pigeons had flown from
Thebes in Egypt, and established oracles, one at Dodona, and the other
in Libya, the same writer says, the story doubtless refers to two
priestesses stolen by the Phœnicians, and carried one into Libya and
the other into Greece: he adds, “their being _black_ explains to us
their _Egyptian_ origin.” Pausanias likewise informs us that the image
of the Nile was always black, while the other river gods were uniformly
represented as white.

The ancient statues of Memnon and the Sphinx afford no evidence with
regard to complexion, because they are usually painted red; that being
the color applied to sacred subjects both in Egypt and various parts of
India.

The features, with the exception of the lips, do not correspond to
the standard of “African features,” which we have somewhat arrogantly
established. In point of fact, the various tribes of that vast
continent differ from each other in appearance as much as the Italians
and the Norwegians; and we have taken the worst-looking as our standard
of “negro features.” Dr. Richardson says: “The Nubians are perfectly
black, but without possessing the least of the negro feature; the lips
small, the nose aquiline; the expression of the countenance sweet and
animated, and bearing a strong resemblance to that which is generally
found portrayed in the temples and tombs of the ancient Egyptians.”

A recent traveller tells us, “The Ethiopian women brought to Egypt
for sale, though black, are extremely beautiful; their features being
perfectly regular, and their eyes full of fire. The price offered for
them is generally six or ten times higher than could be obtained for
Arabian women.”

Herodotus says, the Egyptian women left the management of the loom to
men, while they themselves were abroad engaged in commerce; and that
the laws required daughters, instead of sons, to support indigent
parents. Some writers have said that the queens of Egypt were much more
honored than the kings; and that in the marriage contract husbands
promised obedience to their wives.

It seems probable that there was something of exaggeration in this.
Perhaps the opinion had its origin in some intentional satire, which
was supposed to be sober truth. That the Egyptian women enjoyed a
degree of freedom and importance very uncommon in that age of the
world, is beyond a doubt. That they were not confined to their own
apartments is evident from the fact that Pharaoh’s daughter went down
to the river with her maidens to bathe. They likewise succeeded to the
throne, and to the inheritance of their fathers. When Solomon married
the daughter of Pharaoh, he built her a magnificent palace near his
own, and allowed her to worship the gods of her own country. As this
was in direct opposition to the customs and opinions of the Israelites,
there is reason to suppose these peculiar privileges were stipulated by
Egyptians in the marriage contract. Her father gave her the whole city
of Gazer for her portion.

It is not probable that women of rank were engaged in laborious
occupations, as was common in other countries. When Psammenitus, one of
their kings, was taken prisoner, he and the chief of his nobility were
placed on an eminence near the city of Memphis, while his own daughter
and other captive women were ordered to bear water in pitchers from
the river; and the monarch is said to have considered this a greater
disgrace than the loss of his kingdom and his liberty.

But notwithstanding the high respect paid to Egyptian women, and
the undoubted fact that they were largely engaged in commerce and
agriculture, there are many things to prove that they had not such
unlimited ascendency as to reverse the usual order of things, by
governing their husbands, and compelling them to do the work within
doors.

The honorable office of the priesthood was entirely confined to the
men, both in the temples of the goddesses and the gods. The mercantile
caravans, going through rude and warlike places, could not have been
composed of women. In one of the ancient Egyptian mausoleums have been
found paintings in bass-relief, representing men planning furniture,
hewing blocks of wood, pressing out skins of wine or oil, ploughing,
hoeing, and bringing in asses laden with corn to be stored in the
magazines; there is likewise a group of boatmen quarrelling, and a
band of musicians playing on the harp, the flute, and a species of
clarionet. The only women introduced are a group of dancing women.

Nymphodorus remarks that Sesostris obliged the men to employ themselves
in feminine occupations, because his subjects were becoming very
numerous, and he wished to weaken their characters, in order to prevent
revolt. In opposition to those writers, who attribute such unlimited
freedom and influence to the Egyptian women, some have asserted that
they were kept constantly shut up, and their feet cramped, according to
the present custom of the Chinese.

It is probable that these contradictory accounts refer to different
parts of Egypt; for the various districts differed so much in their
customs, that what was worshipped in one was despised and abhorred in
another.

The superstitions of the Egyptians formed a singular contrast with
their scientific knowledge. They held many animals in religious
veneration; such as the ibis, the crocodile, the cat, and the dog. If a
cat happened to die, the whole family shaved their eyebrows in token of
sorrow; and on the death of a dog, they shaved the brows and the head.
Maximus Tyrius tells the story of an Egyptian woman, who brought up a
young crocodile. “Her countrymen esteemed her particularly fortunate,
and considered her the nurse of a deity. The woman had a son about the
same age with the crocodile, and they grew up and played together. When
the animal became large and strong, it devoured the child. The woman
exulted in the death of her son, and considered his fate as blessed in
the extreme, in thus becoming the victim of their domestic god.”

The ancient Egyptians believed the Nile would not overflow and
fertilize their country, unless an annual sacrifice were offered to the
deity of the river. For this reason, they every year, on the twelfth
of their month Baoni, (corresponding to our June,) threw into the Nile
a beautiful maiden, superbly ornamented. When Amru conquered Egypt, he
abolished this cruel custom.

The Egyptians were fond of religious festivals, which they celebrated
with music, dancing, feasting, and pompous processions. The women on
these occasions were usually decorated with garlands, and carried in
their hands symbols of the deity they worshipped. Herodotus, speaking
of the famous festival of Isis, at Bubastis, says, “During the passage,
the women strike their tabors, accompanied by the men playing on
flutes.” Yet some writers have affirmed that the Egyptians did not
allow women to learn music, lest it should relax the vigor of their
minds. This might be true of some districts in Egypt; but it is more
probable that public exhibitions of music were considered beneath
the dignity of any but hired performers, as public dancing is still
considered in many parts of the world.

The Egyptians, in common with other ancient nations, sanctioned great
immodesty at their religious festivals; particularly those of Isis
and Bacchus. We have no means of ascertaining how far this tended to
corrupt the manners of their women. Among people of rank, birthdays
were kept with great gayety and splendor.

They were accustomed to seat a veiled skeleton at their tables,
decorated with a garland of dark-colored flowers; this was intended
to remind the guests that death was with them, even in the midst of
feasting and joy.

The common tendency to invest women with supernatural powers seems to
have existed in Egypt. We are told that Athyrte, daughter of Sesostris,
encouraged her father to undertake the conquest of the world, in
consequence of her divinations, dreams in the temples, and prodigies
she had seen in the air. Though women were not admitted to the order
of hereditary priesthood, they were from time immemorial selected to
perform certain sacred offices in the Egyptian temples. It was the duty
of these consecrated maidens to gather flowers for the altars, to feed
the sacred birds, and daily to fill the vases with pure fresh water
from the Nile. The moon was worshipped in Egypt as a goddess, under the
name of Isis; and it is supposed that these maidens performed certain
mystic dances in her temple, as the _devedassees_ of Hindostan now do
in the temples of Brama. On these solemn occasions, the Egyptian girls
wore small metallic mirrors under the left breast. The origin of the
custom is unknown; some have supposed it was done that they might at
every movement of their companions behold the reflected image of Isis.

Notwithstanding the prevalence of strange superstitions, it is
generally supposed that the knowledge of one God, and of the
immortality of the soul, were taught by Egyptian priests; and that
these truths, carried into Greece, were concealed and preserved in
the Eleusinian mysteries. The early Christians were surprised at the
frequent appearance of a _cross_ among the hieroglyphics of Egypt; some
converted priests explained the mystery, by saying it had always been
considered a symbol of _life to come_.

The ancient Egyptians were scrupulously neat. They bathed frequently,
and washed their garments often. It was their custom to drink from
brazen goblets, which were cleansed every day. In making bread, they
kneaded the dough with their feet.

When a person of distinction died, it was customary for the females
of the family to disfigure their heads and faces with dirt, and run
about with their garments in disorder, beating themselves and making
loud lamentations. This custom, so common among ancient nations, still
prevails in many parts of the East.

There was a library at Thebes; and Homer was accused of stealing the
Iliad and Odyssey from a similar establishment at Memphis. Though
this accusation bears internal evidence of falsehood, it indicates
the very ancient date of civilization and literature in Egypt. That
this taste continued down to comparatively modern times appears from
the celebrated Alexandrian library, established by the Ptolemies. The
number of volumes is said to have almost equalled the largest library
of recent times, and most of them were written in letters of gold.

Since the ancient Egyptian women were allowed in all other respects
such a remarkable degree of equality with the men, it is reasonable to
conjecture that they shared with them in literary acquirements.

       *       *       *       *       *

Modern Egypt presents quite a different picture. The population is a
mixture of Egyptians, Persians, Syrians, Greeks, Arabs, and Turks. The
men are ignorant, and the women servile. “Each family,” says Savary,
“forms a small state, of which the father is king; the members of
it, attached to him by the ties of blood, acknowledge and submit to
his power. When the master of the family dines, the women stand, and
frequently hold the basin for him to wash, serve him at table, and on
all occasions behave to him with the extremest humility and reverence.
The women of the wealthier classes spend their time principally among
their slaves, in works of embroidery.”

When a rich man intends to dine with one of his wives, he sends a slave
to give her notice; she prepares the most delicate dishes, and receives
him with the utmost attention and respect.

Notwithstanding the general degradation of the sex, a virtuous and
sensible woman can make herself greatly respected, even in degenerate
Egypt. “The favorite wife of Mohammed Ali possessed an astonishing
degree of influence over her impetuous husband, who always regarded her
as the foundation of his good fortune. She was, likewise, much esteemed
and beloved by the people; for her power was uniformly exercised on the
side of justice and mercy. Much of her time was occupied in receiving
petitions; but she seldom had to refer them to the pacha, as her
ascendency was too well known by the ministers to require this last
appeal. If, however, in consequence of any demur on their part, she was
obliged to apply to him, he answered their remonstrances by saying,
‘’Tis enough. By my two eyes! if _she_ requires it, the thing must be
done, be it through fire, water, or stone.’”

The Turkish conquerors have carried into Egypt the enervating despotism
and luxurious voluptuousness, which characterize their own land. The
favorite residence of the pacha’s harem is at Shoubra, three miles
below Cairo. In the garden are groves of fruit-trees, and walks shaded
by evergreens, paved with pebbles in mosaic. A most splendid bath is
inclosed by a quadrangular platform of white sand-stone, on which rests
a handsome corridor. At each corner of the bath is a dressing room,
and between each of these a magnificent divan, the canopy of which
is supported by white marble pillars beautifully sculptured. In the
centre of the bath is a seat for the pacha himself, from which he may
behold his innumerable wives floating in the water around him. A highly
sculptured gallery extends all around in front of the divans, resting
upon the heads of four large crocodiles of white marble, from whose
mouths the bath is partly supplied with water. In the centre is a grand
_jet d’eau_; marble vases filled with flowers are dispersed about; and
large statues of lions guard the doors. Water for this enormous bath is
brought from the Nile by Persian wheels. The interior of this palace is
rich with gilding, carved work, embroidery, and velvet hangings. The
dress of the pacha’s favorites corresponds to the splendor of their
residence. Some American ladies, who recently obtained permission to
visit his harem, say that even the attendants wore head-dresses covered
with diamonds.

No glass windows are seen in Egypt, except in a few houses built by
Christian residents. A very close wooden lattice-work conceals the
inmates of the house, excludes the air, and gives rather a dismal
appearance to the streets. The quadrangular court in the centre
(always formed by the eastern manner of arranging the walls of their
buildings) is, however, open to the breezes, and generally kept wet and
cool by a fountain playing on marble or stone pavements. This, as in
other Mohammedan countries, is the usual place where the women sit at
their weaving and embroidery, and are amused by the gambols of their
children, or the dances of their attendants.

The Arabs who live in cities keep their wives in very close seclusion.
In the large towns of Egypt these women rarely have more than one
apartment, in which they eat, drink, and sleep. At night a piece of
carpet is spread on the floor, and they lie down to rest, generally
without changing their clothes. No male stranger is ever allowed to set
his foot within the _harem_, and the ladies are not suffered to go out
of it without being guarded and screened. The Arabs always decorate
these bird cages with as much gilding, painting, carving, mosaic, and
silk hangings, as their wealth will possibly allow; and they indulge
their captives, to the utmost of their power, in rich shawls, muslins,
silks, pearls, emeralds, and diamonds. In summer the common people
often sleep on the flat roofs of their dwellings.

The Egyptian women, beside a large white veil over the head, usually
wear a black handkerchief tied under the eyes and falling below the
chin. Two sparkling eyes are the only part of the countenance that is
visible. This, with their long loose robes tied up to the throat, gives
them a strange spectral appearance. In cities many of these figures are
seen gliding about, selling the embroidered handkerchiefs, so much used
in the East, as parting presents to guests, and to wipe the fingers
after eating sweetmeats, of which they are universally fond.

The country girls, closely veiled, are frequently employed in selling
melons, pomegranates, eggs, poultry, &c. Their arms are often tattooed
in fanciful patterns, and sometimes their faces are disfigured in the
same way. It is a general custom to stain the eyebrows black and the
fingers red.

Everywhere on the banks of the Nile, the poorer sort of women may be
seen bringing up water from the river, in pitchers on their heads, or
shoulders. In consequence of this habit, their motions are universally
firm, well balanced, and graceful.

The Syrian women who reside in Egypt retain the customs of their
country, and of course have more freedom than the Mohammedans. They
seldom if ever go into the public streets without veils; but at
home they eat and drink with their husbands, and are introduced to
their guests. Even the wealthiest personally assist in the domestic
occupations of the family, and hand refreshments and embroidered
handkerchiefs to their visiters. The Syrian women are said to be
generally distinguished by the peculiar beauty of their hands and arms.

A great number of slaves, of all colors and shades, are sold in Egypt;
and these scenes are characterized by all the brutal and disgusting
particulars which must necessarily everywhere attend the sale of human
beings. When the French army left Egypt, shameful transactions were
witnessed upon the quay at Rosetta. The French were busily employed in
selling to the British troops the women who had lived with them during
their stay in the country. Several of the English soldiers bought very
pretty girls for one dollar each. These scenes occurred between two
_Christian_ nations!

There are public dancers in Egypt, of a character similar to those in
India, but said to have less skill and grace. One of their most common
dances at weddings, and other entertainments, is very similar to the
Spanish fandango, but abundantly more indelicate.

After three o’clock in the day the women have the public baths to
themselves; and here, as in Turkey, they are a favorite place of
resort. Those Egyptians who have not private baths, often hire one of
the public ones for an entire day, and indulge themselves in the luxury
of taking with them their dinners, women, dancers, and story-tellers.
With regard to a change of garments, the Egyptians are very uncleanly.

The marriage ceremonies are like those of Turkey.

The Egyptian women often wear amber or glass beads on the right wrist,
and the left is almost always encircled with a brass twist. Sometimes
they have bracelets above the elbow, with rings on the fingers and
thumb.

As you go south, the swarthy complexion of the people becomes darker.
In Upper Egypt (the site of ancient Egypt) the inhabitants are quite
black. The women are tall, slim, erect, and generally well formed.
They have very perfect teeth; but the mouth is distorted by the custom
of making the under lip project, and coloring it blue. Their hair
generally hangs in braids all round the head, those on the forehead
being shorter. Their dress, ornaments, and occupations, are similar
to those in other parts of Egypt, excepting that they do not wear
veils. They are very modest, but have such simplicity of manners, that
they nurse their babes before travellers without any consciousness of
impropriety. Their dances are rapid and vigorous, mixed with undulating
motions, as they from time to time bend towards their partners. Both
sexes are extremely fond of this amusement, and their performances are
said to be far from ungraceful.

In some remote and poor villages of Egypt the people are more
barbarous; the women grease their hair, wear rings in their nostrils,
and strips of black leather for bracelets.

       *       *       *       *       *

While Tyre was in its greatest prosperity, the capital of wealthy and
proud Phœnicia, Pygmalion, the king, had a sister Eliza, generally
known by the name of Dido. She married one of her royal relatives,
named Sichæus, whom her brother put to death, in order to obtain
possession of his immense fortune. Dido privately eloped with the most
valuable of her husband’s effects, and after many disasters arrived at
the northern part of Africa, near the place where Tunis now stands.
Here she settled a colony, and built a city, called Carthage, which in
the Phœnician language signified the New City. What Virgil relates of
this queen is a fiction. She is supposed to have lived at least two
hundred years before Æneas. Having bound herself by a solemn oath never
to marry a second husband, she refused the offers of Jarbas, king of
Getulia, who threatened to make war upon her colony, if she persisted
in her resolution. Regarding her vow as sacred, and being unwilling
to bring trouble upon her subjects, she caused a funeral pile to be
kindled, into which she leaped and died.

History gives no information concerning the treatment of females in
Carthagenia: a nation which owed its existence to a woman, who during
her lifetime governed them with wisdom, and died to avoid involving
them in danger, certainly ought to have regarded them with respect and
tenderness. This is in some degree implied by the fact that when Tyre
was besieged by Alexander, the Carthagenians, unable to assist them
because they themselves were at war, offered to receive all the Tyrian
women and children within their walls.

The conduct of Carthagenian women, during the invasion of Scipio,
proves that they could not have been in a very degraded state. They not
only freely gave all their jewels for the public service, but they
labored hard in erecting fortifications, and both maidens and matrons
shaved their heads, that their hair might be used for cordage. And
when at last there was no alternative but to yield to the conqueror or
perish, the wife of Asdrubal, the Carthagenian general, reproached him
for his cowardice in supplicating mercy from the enemy, and seizing her
infant children, rushed into the flames of the temple of Esculapius,
which she herself had kindled.

       *       *       *       *       *

The inhabitants of the Barbary states and the neighboring deserts are
descendants of the Arabs, known by the general name of Moors. Their
manner of building is nearly the same that has prevailed in Syrian and
Arabian cities from the earliest ages. Their houses have flat terraced
roofs, sheltered courts with fountains in the midst, large doors, and
spacious chambers. One small latticed window looks into the street;
the others open into the private court. The latticed window is for
the convenience of women on the occasion of great festivals. At such
times both the inside and outside of the houses are much adorned, and
the women show themselves in their best apparel. The same custom seems
to be alluded to in Scripture, where we are told that when Jehu came
to Jezreel, “Jezebel heard of it; and painted her face, and tired her
head, and looked out at a window.”

On the occasion of a wedding, or any other great domestic ceremony, the
company are received in the open court, which is strewed with mats and
carpets for their reception. In summer these courts are screened from
the sun by means of an awning drawn up with ropes, like the covering of
a tent. The large chambers are generally entirely separated; each wife
having her own apartment. Sometimes, when married children continue to
reside with their parents, one room serves for a whole family. At the
end of each chamber there is a little gallery raised a few feet above
the floor, with steps leading to it. Here they place their beds; a
custom which explains the Scripture phrases, “go up unto thy bed,” and
“come down from thy bed.”

The wealthy have their walls hung with velvet and damask of various
colors, the ceiling richly gilded, or painted in arabesques, and the
floor paved with painted tiles.

Linen, flax, figs, and raisins, are dried on the terraced roofs, which
are guarded by a balustrade, or lattice work. On these roofs they
likewise enjoy the cool breezes of evening, and when the weather is
very warm they sleep there.

The dwellings of the poor are constructed merely of palm branches,
plastered with mud and clay, which in case of a shower sometimes
dissolves and tumbles in pieces. The wandering tribes, called Arabs,
live in tents, and have habits similar to the Bedouins.

The hills and valleys about Algiers are ornamented with pretty gardens
and country-seats, where the wealthy inhabitants retire during the
summer season. These gardens are well stocked with vegetables and
fruit, and the rivulets afford an abundant supply of excellent water.

Young children go entirely without clothing. The women wear a long
wide robe, generally blue, without sleeves, and modestly high in the
neck. Another piece of cloth, usually of a different color, is thrown
over the shoulders, like a mantle. Some wear sandals, others European
slippers, either of red or yellow morocco. In passing over the hot
sands of the desert, they sometimes wear high wooden clogs, which raise
them several inches above the ground, similar to those used to protect
the feet on entering the hottest rooms of the eastern baths. The long
ample drawers worn by girls are of striped linen or silk, and sometimes
embroidered with divers colors. When women appear in public they muffle
themselves up in large mantles or blankets, called _hykes_, and veil
themselves so that nothing can be seen but their eyes. Like other
Arabs, they stain their eyebrows with powder of antimony, and sometimes
paint a spot on the forehead, the chin, and one cheek; a circle round
the eyes, in red or black, is likewise considered becoming. In the
country they often go abroad without being veiled; but if they see
a stranger approach they hastily screen their faces. Their hair is
generally long and intensely black. They plait it in several tresses,
and adorn it with ribbons, with glass, amber, or coral beads, and
sometimes with shells. Sometimes two of these tresses are tied over the
bosom, while the others fall over the shoulders, nearly to the ground;
at other times the braids are arranged in a very becoming manner on
the top of the head. The latter fashion forms a species of crown, over
which elderly women wrap a piece of blue or white cloth, which crosses
under the chin, and is tied behind. They may be often seen carrying on
their heads large leathern bags, containing clothes, provisions, &c.

The Moorish women have generally bright sparkling black eyes, and
handsome features. Those who are engaged in laborious occupations
become swarthy; but ladies secluded from the influence of the sun often
have delicate complexions. The higher classes in Tunis are particularly
spoken of as handsome in their persons and elegant in dress; they often
wear robes of the richest silk, adorned with gold buttons, lace, and
embroidery.

The Moorish ladies have generally a great passion for ornament. They
decorate their persons with heavy gold ear-rings; necklaces of amber,
coral, and gold; gold bracelets; gold chains and silver bells for the
ankles; rings on the fingers; silver cords around the head, with silver
rings hanging pendent to the shoulder; and around the waist, under
their garments, they wear ten or twelve strings of glass or crystal
beads, which jingle as they walk. The poorer class in Fezzan wear glass
beads around the head, and curl the hair in large ringlets, into which
they stuff a kind of paste made of lavender, cloves, pepper, mastich,
and laurel leaves mixed up with oil. Men are proud of having their
wives handsomely dressed, because it is an indication of their own
wealth and importance. Dr. Shaw says the Barbary women are so partial
to the small mirrors which they wear about their necks, that “they will
not lay them aside even when, after the drudgery of the day, they are
obliged to go two or three miles, with a pitcher or goat-skin, to fetch
water.”

The want of water in many places prevents them from washing their
garments so often as is necessary for cleanliness. They anoint
themselves with rancid butter, in order to keep off musquitoes and
other insects.

When engaged in the house at work, the Barbary matrons not only lay
aside their hykes and tunics, but even their drawers, wearing merely a
cloth wrapped around them.

The women weave a coarse kind of cloth for the tent-coverings, made of
goats’ or camels’ hair. It is woven in broad stripes, impervious to
the rain. One of their principal occupations is the manufacture of the
hykes or blankets, universally worn both by men and women. They have
no looms, or shuttles. The warp is fastened to a peg in the ground,
and the woof carried through with their fingers. They make butter in a
goat-skin exposed to the sun. The Barbary cows give very little milk,
but the sheep and goats are both useful for the purposes of the dairy.
When the women make cheese, they separate the curd from the whey with
the flowers of the great-headed thistle, or wild artichoke. The curds
are put into small baskets made of rushes, or dwarf-palm, bound up
close, and pressed. These cheeses seldom weigh more than two or three
pounds. In the morning, the children and slaves are sent out to tend
the cattle, and do not return until nightfall; the women in the mean
time are engaged in their numerous household occupations, and not
unfrequently work in the fields, and collect wood for cooking. When
the tribes find it necessary to travel, the slaves drive the cattle,
and the women take care of the dromedaries, while the men, mounted and
armed, form a van-guard to protect the troop. The wives and daughters
of the wealthy sit cross-legged on a small round concave saddle, placed
on the back of a dromedary, and generally screened from the sun by a
slight awning. The Barbary ox, a strong docile animal, with a large
hump above the shoulders, is likewise much used for riding.

The Moors are indolent to excess. They lie whole days upon their mats
sleeping and smoking, while the women and slaves perform all the labor.
Owing to their uncleanly habits, they are much infested with vermin;
and as they consider it beneath their own dignity to remove this
annoyance, the task is imposed upon the women. They are very impatient
and tyrannical, and for the slightest offence beat their wives most
cruelly. The women, far from thinking a sound drubbing any disgrace,
are rather disposed to regard it as a sign that their lords and masters
consider them of some importance; but they are extremely mortified if
the husband makes any complaint to relations. The Moors, like other
Mohammedans, regard women as a very inferior race, created to serve
them with unconditional submission. Wives are obliged to stand and
wait upon their husbands while they are eating, and must be content
with whatever food the men choose to leave. When a European expressed
his surprise at such customs, they answered, “Why should such inferior
creatures be allowed to eat and drink with us? If they commit faults,
why should they not be beaten? They were made to bring us children,
pound our rice, make our oil, and do our drudgery; these are the only
purposes to which their degraded natures are adapted.”

Precisely the same arguments for abusing the defenceless are urged by
Christian slave-owners! Among the Moors, masters and their Mohammedan
slaves eat together; but if the slave be a Christian, he must eat by
himself, and even the women and children will not touch the food he
leaves. Illiberal and barbarous as this custom appears to us, they
no doubt would regard as still more absurd the customs of the United
States, which render it an abomination for two people of different
complexions to eat at the same table. Their own superstitious
abhorrence is inculcated by the Mohammedan creed, which they regard as
sacred; but our prejudice is in direct opposition to the maxims of that
religion, which we profess to reverence. In this respect, we must yield
to the Algerine in point of sincerity and consistency.

Moorish daughters receive no portion of their father’s property, and
have no dowry at the time of their marriage. When a man dies, his
wife takes her young children and goes to live with her mother. The
daughters are dependent on their elder brother. If the children are
quite young, the chief of the tribe takes possession of the property,
until the boys are old enough to have it divided among them. If there
is no male child, the brother of the deceased is his heir.

The Moorish women, like the men, are exceedingly ignorant, covetous,
and gluttonous; but they are not, like them, universally licentious;
for they are taught that virtuous wives will become celestial beauties
in another world, while all who fail in this duty will be forever
annihilated. An unfaithful wife is punished with immediate death. A man
has as many wives and female slaves as he can maintain.

Although the inhabitants of Fezzan are Mohammedans, their women are
seen a great deal in public, and are remarkable for wanton manners.
Some of the customs of the Moors seem at variance with their habitual
contempt of women. The wives of chiefs are always appointed to conduct
negotiations for peace; and a feminine voice of entreaty will arrest
the uplifted scimetar just ready to fall on the head of an enemy. In
common with the Bedouins, they consider the female apartments as a
sanctuary, which protects even the murderer. In some tribes, where the
women never appear before the men, the criminal, if he gets within
hearing of their dwellings, calls out, “I am under the protection of
the harem!” The inmates, without showing themselves, cry aloud, “Fly
from him! Fly from him!” and even if the man were condemned to death by
the prince himself, he is from that moment free to go where he pleases.

It would be considered a great breach of politeness for a Moor to enter
his neighbor’s tent. If he wishes to see him, he calls him out; and the
wife, hearing his voice, immediately veils herself. It would likewise
be improper for a husband, when he entered the female apartments, to
recline upon the mat which his wife was accustomed to use.

The Mongearts are an agricultural tribe, less intelligent, and more
mild, than their neighbors. Their wives perform the greater part of the
labor, but are not treated with so much harshness as among the other
tribes. They have a simple method of preventing disputes when they
divide the spoils taken in war or hunting. They separate the booty into
as many lots as there are men; then each one puts some article into a
bag, which is well shaken up, and the first woman or child they see, is
called upon to take an article out of the bag, and lay it upon one of
the lots. Each one recognizes what he put into the bag, and is obliged
to rest satisfied with the lot on which it happens to be placed.

The Monselemines are said to be even more avaricious than other Moors.
Every thing with them is settled by money. Among the other tribes, if
a Mohammedan woman were known to have a Christian lover, she would be
killed, and the man must change his religion to avoid death; but the
Monselemines throw the woman into the sea, and allow the Christian to
atone for his crime with money. The _talbes_, or Moorish priests, take
as many wives as they can support. The women, as in other Mohammedan
countries, do not go to the mosques, but perform their devotions at
home, with their faces turned toward the east.

The Moors have extraordinary ideas concerning female beauty. They
fancy an oily skin, teeth projecting beyond the lips, pointed nails
an inch long, and a figure so corpulent, that two persons putting
their arms around the waist could scarcely make their fingers touch.
A woman of moderate pretensions to beauty needs a slave under each
arm to support her as she walks; and a perfect belle carries weight
enough to load a camel. Mothers are so anxious to have their daughters
attain this unwieldy size, that they make them eat a great quantity of
_kouskous_,[7] and drink several bowls of camel’s milk every day. Mungo
Park says he has seen a poor girl sit crying for more than an hour with
the bowl at her lips, while her mother stood over her with a stick, and
beat her whenever she perceived she was not swallowing.

Still there are some girls of fourteen or fifteen, who have what
Europeans would consider a very graceful shape, with a fine glow of
health flushing their brown cheeks. Their teeth are regular, and always
very white, owing to the constant practice of rubbing them with a
little stick of tamarind wood.

The Moors marry at a very early age. Wives are always purchased; and
the father of the girl cannot refuse an offer, unless there is some
stain upon the young man’s character. The bridal tent is adorned with a
small white flag, and the bridegroom’s brow is encircled with a fillet
of the same color. The bride is conducted to the tent by her parents,
where her lover presents her with garments and jewels, according to his
wealth. A grand entertainment is given, and the young women dance all
day to the sound of instruments, while the spectators regulate their
motions by clapping hands. These dances are not very decorous.

The next day the young wife is bathed by her female relations, who
braid her hair, stain her nails red, and put on a new dress. She visits
in the camp all day, and in the evening is conducted back to her
husband’s tent. If her father be destitute, his son-in-law generally
assists him with a willing heart; and if the bridegroom be poor, her
father does all he can to enable him to increase his flocks and herds.
If a wife does not become the mother of a boy, she may be divorced with
consent of the elders of the tribe, which is always granted; in this
case she is at liberty to marry again. The mother of many sons is held
in the highest respect, and is never suffered to perform any menial
office. If a woman is very unhappy with her husband, she goes back to
her parents; and though he may try to persuade her to live with him
again, he cannot compel her to do it. If she persist in her dislike,
she is even at liberty to marry another. But if she has a child,
especially if it be a boy, this permission is not granted; should she
stay with her parents more than eight days, under such circumstances,
she would be liable to be put to death. Women do not take the name of
their husbands, but always retain the one they received in infancy. The
birth of a son is attended with the greatest rejoicings. The mother,
by way of expressing her delight, blackens her face, for the space of
forty days. On the birth of a girl, she blackens only half her face,
for twenty days.

When a Moor sets out on a journey, his wife follows him about twenty
paces from the dwelling; she then throws after him the stone used to
drive the tent-pegs into the ground, and wherever it stops, she buries
it until his return.

The Moors, like their Arab brethren, are exceedingly hospitable. A
traveller is always sure of some refreshment, for his host would rather
go without food himself than refuse it to a guest. If the master be
absent, his wife, or slave, goes out to meet the stranger, asks him to
stop at twenty paces from the tent, brings milk for him to drink, sees
that his camels are unloaded, and furnishes him with mats and awnings
to erect a temporary shelter for himself. If the guest be a man of
rank, or one who has friends in the tribe, a sheep or an ox is killed
in honor of his arrival. The wife cooks the meat, separating the fat,
which is served up raw. The visiter’s share is placed on a small mat,
carried by a slave, but always handed to him by the master himself, if
he be at home.

The Moors plunder all travellers except those who are protected by the
sacred rites of hospitality. Even the law authorizes theft in the night
time; and on this account the women are very careful to convey into the
tents every article of property before dark.

One of the greatest pleasures of Moorish women consists in visiting
each other. Politeness requires that the guest should dress the
provisions, make the butter, and cook the dinner, while her hostess
entertains her with details of family affairs, and all the scandal and
gossip of the tribe. On these occasions an unusual quantity of food is
provided, and the master invites his neighbors to the repast. The more
cooking the visiter has to do, the more she feels honored.

At funerals, the women howl and lament; a practice they continue at
intervals, from the moment of decease till they return from the grave
where their relative or friend has been deposited.

The Moors continually go out on predatory excursions to seize the
negroes for slaves, to supply the insatiable market produced by
_Christian_ pride and avarice. Sometimes they lie in ambush round a
village for days together, and when the helpless women and children
come to the springs to get water, they seize them and carry them off.
They place their captives behind them on horseback, holding one of
their fingers between their teeth, ready to bite it off, if they give
the least alarm.

Sometimes they set fire to a village at midnight, and seize the poor
wretches that try to escape from the flames. The negroes have strong
local attachments, and on such occasions the most agonizing scenes
frequently occur.

The wives of wealthy Moorish chiefs have black female slaves, to whom
they transfer all the toil, while they loll upon mats, smoking their
pipes all day long. The poor slaves, who are treated with the utmost
haughtiness and rigor, try to anticipate the slightest wish of their
indolent mistresses. Sometimes they carry their attention so far, as
to pick up every stone or stick, that might annoy the feet of these
walking flesh mountains.

If a Moor has a son by any of his black slaves, the girl is much better
treated than before; her child shares equal privileges with the other
children, and is acknowledged as a free fellow-citizen like themselves.
In this respect Christian slave-owners might learn a useful lesson from
the ignorant Moslem.

       *       *       *       *       *

The dwellings of negroes are generally huts made of the branches of
trees and thatched with palmetto. The king’s residence usually consists
of a number of these huts surrounded by a clay wall. Each wife has a
separate building, sometimes divided from the apartments of the men
by a slight bamboo fence. Some of the African huts are very prettily
painted, or stained, and the walls adorned with curious straw work. The
Ashantees display a considerable degree of taste and even elegance in
their architecture. Their houses and door-posts are elaborately carved
with representations of warlike processions, and serpents seizing their
prey.

The various African tribes differ as much in personal appearance as the
inhabitants of the numerous Asiatic kingdoms. The Pulahs, or Fulahs,
of Bondu, between the Senegal and Gambia, are copper-colored, and have
long hair. Some of them are black, though less so than many tribes.
Their women are slender and graceful, with languishing eyes, and soft
voices. The Wolofs are tall and well-shaped, with prominent and rather
aquiline noses, lips not very thick, black complexions, uncommonly
sweet voices, and a very frank, mild expression of countenance. This
tribe is considered the handsomest in Africa. A people called Laobehs,
whose manners bear a great resemblance to those of the gypsies, are
intermixed with the Wolofs, but have no fixed residence. They select
some well-wooded spot, where they fell a few trees, form huts with
the branches, and work up the trunks into mortars, and other wooden
vessels. The women pretend to tell fortunes; and though short,
ugly, and sluttish, they are much sought as wives, on account of a
superstition that such connections bring good luck. The Laobehs possess
no animals but asses, on which they travel during their frequent
peregrinations. Groups of these men and women may often be seen
squatting round a fire, smoking and talking.

The color of the Mandingoes is black intermixed with yellow. They have
regular features, with a frank, intelligent expression. The women
are almost universally well-shaped and handsome. The inhabitants
of Bambara are not so black as the Wolofs, but have no pretensions
to beauty. They have round heads, very closely curled hair, coarse
features, flat noses, thick lips, high cheek-bones, and bandy legs.
The inhabitants of Bornou, Mozambique, and Southern Guinea, bear a
great resemblance to those of Bambarra. The Congoese have European
features, bright eyes, and black complexions. The Kaffers, or Caffres,
have likewise the European conformation of head and features; their
complexion is glossy black, their eyes large and sparkling, their
teeth are beautifully white and regular, and the expression of
their countenances bright and good-humored. Travellers all agree in
describing the men as uncommonly noble and majestic figures. The women
are of lower stature, rather muscular than graceful; but many of them
have very handsome faces.

The African women wear two long strips of cotton cloth, either blue
or white. One is tied round the waist and falls below the knees; the
other is worn over the shoulders like a mantle. The latter garment is
generally thrown aside when they are at work. The upper part of the
person is almost universally exposed. The wealthy sometimes wear a kind
of robe without sleeves, under their _pagnes_, or mantles. Mungo Park
speaks of seeing women in Bondou, who wore a thin kind of gauze, called
_byqui_, which displayed their shape to the utmost advantage. Sandals
are sometimes worn, but they more frequently go barefoot. Women of
the island of St Louis, who are generally handsome, and many of them
fair, by frequent intermarriages with Europeans, wear a long garment of
striped cotton fastened at the waist, with another four or five yards
in length thrown over the shoulders in the antique style. Striped cloth
is twisted round the head, so as to form a high turban. Their slippers
are usually of red, yellow, or green morocco, and they are seldom
without golden ear-rings, necklaces, and bracelets.

The Kaffer women wear a cloak made of leopard or calf skins, dressed
in such a manner as to be exceedingly soft and pliant. This garment,
which is worn over the shoulders, and conceals all the upper part of
the person, is never laid aside except in the very hottest weather.
They wear no other clothing but a small apron. It is a singular fact
that the Kaffer men care much more about ornaments than the women.
Almost every individual wears necklaces of beads, or polished bone,
with several ivory bracelets about his arms and ankles. Those who can
afford it have wreaths of copper beads around their heads, from which
brass chains are suspended. The women, on the contrary, seldom wear
any other ornament than a row of beads, or small shells, around the
edges of their aprons. Females of the royal family sometimes have a few
brass buttons on their cloaks, and beads or shells on the skin caps
they wear in cold weather. The other African women are very fond of
ornaments. They decorate their heads with coral beads, sea-shells, and
grains of gold and silver. Sometimes a small plate of gold is worn
in the middle of the forehead. The gold dust, which they collect, is
kept in quills, stopped with cotton; and these are frequently displayed
in the hair. Sometimes strips of linen are stretched upon a stick, so
as to form a turban in the shape of a sugar loaf, the top of which is
covered with a colored handkerchief. In some places the hair is raised
high by means of a pad, and decorated with an expensive species of
coral brought from the Red sea. Among some tribes the women twist their
woolly locks around straws greased with butter; and when the straws
are drawn out, the hair remains curled in small tufts. This process
requires a whole day. A more neat and simple style, is to braid the
hair in several tresses, made to meet on the top of the head. Almost
all the Africans grease their heads and anoint their bodies; a custom
said to be necessary to prevent cutaneous diseases, and the attacks
of insects, in warm climates. Tattooing is very common, and almost
every tribe has a style peculiarly its own. The gold ornaments worn
in Africa are generally very massive. The heavy ear-rings sometimes
lacerate the ear, to avoid which they are often supported by a band
of red leather, passing over the head from one ear to the other. The
necklaces and bracelets are sometimes of gold fillagree work, very
ingeniously wrought. Daughters of rich families wear a necklace of
coral, intermixed with gold and silver beads, which crosses below the
breast, and is fastened behind, under the shoulders. The skins of
sharks, or strings of beads as large as a pigeon’s egg, are sometimes
worn around the waist, and smaller beads decorate the ankles. In
Bornou, they frequently wear a piece of coral, ivory, or polished
oyster-shell thrust through the nose. African teeth are universally
very white and regular. They are continually rubbed with a small stick
of tamarind-wood, which they hold between their lips like a tooth-pick.
Some tribes on the banks of the Gambia file their teeth to a sharp
point. Mollien is, I believe, the only writer who speaks of veils worn
by any except the Moorish ladies. He thus describes the sister and
niece of a _marabout_,[8] who was his guide: “They had oval faces, fine
features, elegant figures, and a skin as black as jet. I was charmed
with the modesty of these women; whenever I looked at them they cast
down their eyes, and covered their faces with their muslin veils.”

The inhabitants of Madagascar are tall, well proportioned, and of a
very dark olive complexion. The women wear long robes reaching to the
feet, over which is a straight tunic, that covers the upper part of the
person.

The African women make butter by stirring the cream violently in a
large calabash, or shaking it in skins, after the Arab fashion. In
the forests of Bambarra is a tree called _shea_, from the kernel of
which, when boiled in water, a species of vegetable butter is produced.
The women put it down in earthen pots, and preserve it for a long
time. Mungo Park says: “Besides the advantage of keeping a whole
year without salt, it is whiter, firmer, and to my palate of a richer
flavor, than the best butter I ever tasted made of cow’s milk.”

Cheese is never made in the interior of Africa. They give as a reason
for it, the heat of the climate, and the great scarcity of salt.

When the planting season arrives, women dig small holes in the ground,
into each of which they drop three grains of millet, and cover it
with their feet. This simple process is sufficient in a country where
the soil yields almost spontaneously. When the grain is nearly ripe,
they erect tall platforms on poles, where the women and children are
stationed by turns to frighten away the birds, by uttering loud cries.
If the birds become so much accustomed to the noise as to disregard it,
they bind a handful of leaves or straw around each ear of millet, to
prevent their depredations.

Grain, instead of being threshed, is pounded in a mortar, and the chaff
blown away. Mortars are used to prepare it for cooking, except in
Abyssinia, where a daily supply of corn is ground in small hand-mills.

The African women separate the seeds from cotton by rolling it with
a thick iron spindle; and instead of carding it, beat it violently
on a close mat. In spinning, they use the distaff in preference to
the wheel. Throughout the country they may be seen seated on a mat
in front of their huts, engaged in this old-fashioned employment.
Weaving is generally done by men. The women make nets and sails for
their husbands, and cut and sew their garments with needles of native
manufacture. They likewise dye cloth of a rich and permanent blue,
with a fine purple gloss; these cloths are beautifully glazed. In the
manufacture of common earthen vessels for domestic use, the women are
as skilful as the men. A good deal of care is required to prepare the
manioc, which forms a great article of food. This root is ground in
a mill, and dried in small furnaces, before it can be used as flour.
Mats, both for the table and for seats, are woven very firmly and
neatly; hats and baskets are likewise very tastefully made of rushes
stained with different colors; and the gourds from which they drink are
often prettily ornamented with a sort of bamboo work, dyed in a similar
manner.

The Kaffer women make baskets of a strong reedy grass, the workmanship
of which is so clever that they will contain water. At Sackatoo, Mr.
Clapperton met a troop of African girls drawing water from the gushing
rocks. He says: “I asked them for drink. Bending gracefully on one
knee, and displaying at the same time teeth of pearly whiteness, and
eyes of the blackest lustre, they presented a gourd, and appeared
highly delighted when I thanked them for their civility; remarking to
one another, ‘Did you hear the white man thank me?’”

Here, as in Asia, the women generally act as porters, carrying large
burdens on the head. Sometimes they may be seen sitting on mats by the
road-side, selling potatoes, beans, and small bits of roasted meat, to
travellers.

Men and women are both employed in digging and washing gold for the
Moorish markets. Small shells, called _cowries_, constitute the general
currency of Africa. All payments from the king’s household are made in
branches containing two thousand cowries each. The women pierce and
string these, deducting one-fortieth part as their own perquisite.
Four hundred and eighty of these shells are equivalent to a shilling.
The Africans are said to manifest a most extraordinary facility in
reckoning the large sums exchanged for articles of merchandise.
Europeans have been much surprised at this, being themselves unable to
calculate so rapidly without the use of figures.

The wives of the king of Dahomey, generally to the number of three
thousand, are formed into a regiment, part of which act as his
body-guard, equipped with bows, arrows, drums, and sometimes muskets.
They are regularly trained to the use of arms, and go through their
evolutions with as much expertness as any other of his majesty’s
soldiers.

Captain Clapperton thus describes a visit he received from the king of
Kiama: “Six young girls, without any apparel, except a fillet on the
forehead, and a string of beads round the waist, carrying each three
light spears, ran by the side of his horse, keeping pace with it at
full gallop. Their light forms, the vivacity of their eyes, and the
ease with which they seemed to fly over the ground, made them appear
something more than mortal. On the kind’s entrance they laid down
their spears, wrapped themselves in blue mantles, and attended on his
majesty. On his taking leave, they discarded their attire; he mounted
his horse, and away went the most extraordinary cavalcade I ever saw in
my life.”

In time of battle the African women encourage the troops, supply them
with fresh arrows, and hurl stones at their enemies. In some tribes it
is common for them to unite with the men in hunting the lion and the
leopard.

Mr. Campbell attended a palaver, or council, in Southern Africa. He
says, “The speeches were replete with frankness, courage, often with
good sense, and even with a rude species of eloquence. The women stood
behind and took an eager interest in the debate--cheering those whose
sentiments they approved, or bursting into loud laughter at any thing
they considered ridiculous.”

If the king of Congo dies without sons, his daughter, if she be
marriageble, becomes absolute mistress of the kingdom. She visits
various towns and villages, where she causes the men to appear before
her, that she may select a husband from among them. When her choice is
made, she resigns all authority into his hands, and he becomes the king.

Every great man has bands of minstrels, of both sexes, who sing his
praises in extempore poetry, while they play upon drums, or guitars
with three strings.

Some of these _guiriots_, or minstrels, travel about the country with
their families, dancing and singing at every village where their
services are required. The Africans are so partial to these wandering
musicians, that they often make them quite rich by their liberality.
The female singers are covered with various colored beads, and not
unfrequently with ornaments of the precious metals. But though the
_guiriots_ are always welcome at weddings and festivals, though their
songs kindle the soldier’s courage as he goes to battle, and enliven
the dreariness of journeys through the desert, yet they are regarded
with even more contempt than falls upon similar classes in other parts
of the world. Not even a slave would consent to marry into a family
that had followed this profession; and when they die, their bodies
are placed in hollow trees, from the idea that crops of millet would
certainly fail if they were buried in the earth. The _guiriots_ dance
in the same immodest style that characterizes the Asiatic performers.
Their dances are always accompanied by drums and other musical
instruments. Among the Wolofs none but public singers play on any
instrument, it being considered disrespectable for others to practise
this amusement.

The African women are so passionately fond of dancing, that wherever
the itinerant minstrels appear, they flock around them, and encourage
them by songs, while they beat time by clapping their hands. Indeed
with this mirth-loving race every thing furnishes occasion for
festivity and frolic. Their marriages and funerals conclude with
dances; all their festivals are commemorated with songs and dances;
every moonlight night the men and women meet in great numbers to enjoy
this favorite exercise; and if the moon be wanting, they dance by
the light of large fires. The young girls often unite together to
buy palm wine, and after an entertainment at the hut of one of their
companions, they go together through the village, singing in chorus a
variety of charming airs, marking time by clapping their hands; these
strains, though simple, and often repeated, are by no means monotonous.
The Fulah songs are said to have a melancholy sweetness which is
exceedingly captivating; and some of the Wolof airs are gracefully
pathetic, while the measures in which they are composed indicates
skill in music somewhat remarkable in a people so little civilized. On
the banks of rivers and on the sea-coast, the inhabitants of villages
one or two miles distant may be heard singing the same song, and
alternately answering each other. Drums are their most common musical
instruments; beside which they have a guitar of three strings, made
of half a calabash covered with leather; a species of castanets, made
of small gourd shells, filled with pebbles, or Guinea peas, which
the dancers shake in a lively manner; and an instrument resembling a
spinnet, called the _balafo_, in which the notes are struck by small
sticks, terminated by knobs covered with leather. These instruments
are generally of rude construction, and produce dull, heavy tones; but
the voices of the people are peculiarly soft and melodious, and they
are said to keep time with great exactness. Music is never mute in
Africa. Whether the inhabitants are weaving at their doors, laboring
in the fields, rowing their boats, or wandering in the desert, songs
may be heard resounding through the air. Even the poor slaves dragged
to distant markets, suffering with hunger, and thirst, and cruel
laceration, will begin to sing as soon as they have a few moments rest;
particularly if the assurance is given them that after they pass a
certain boundary, they shall be free and dressed in red. Thus does the
God of love console his guileless children even under circumstances
of the greatest external misery! and man, in the wantonness of his
pride, makes this blessed influence of Divine Providence an excuse for
continued cruelty!

The Africans at their convivial meetings are extremely fond of
listening to stories of wild and ludicrous adventures, and the
wonderful effects of magic and enchantments. They have likewise a
species of pantomime or puppet-shows. The women are extravagantly fond
of a game called _ouri_, which they learned from the Arabs. A box with
twelve square holes contains a quantity of round seeds, generally from
the baobab tree. Each player has twenty-one seeds to dispose of; they
play alternately, and draw lots who shall begin. The combinations are
said to be more numerous and complicated than those of chess; yet girls
of ten or twelve years old may often be seen sitting under the shade of
a tree intently studying this difficult game.

Some of the African tribes have become Mohammedans in consequence
of their connection with the Moors; but in general they are pagans.
The belief in one Supreme Being and a future state of rewards and
punishments is, however, universal, and without exception; they
likewise believe that the Almighty has intrusted the government of the
world to subordinate spirits, with whom they suppose certain magical
ceremonies have great influence. When questioned upon these subjects,
they always endeavor to wave the conversation, by answering reverently
that such matters are far above the understanding of man. At the return
of the new moon, (which they suppose to be each time newly created,)
every individual offers a short whispered prayer of thanksgiving; but
they pray at no other time; saying it is presumptuous for mortals to
ask the Deity to change decrees of unerring wisdom. When asked why
they observe a festival at the new moon, they simply answer that their
fathers did so before them.

Phillis Wheatly, a black female child brought from the interior of
Africa, and sold as a slave in Boston, New England, afterward gained
great celebrity by her poetical writings, which, considering the period
in which she lived, and the limited advantages of her own education,
are certainly very remarkable. This intelligent woman could remember
very little about the customs of her native land, excepting that her
mother always poured out water before the rising sun.

Hornemann says it was the custom in Bornou annually to throw a richly
decorated maiden into the Niger, according to the ancient custom in
Egypt.

The Africans, like all uneducated people, are extremely superstitious.
They never go to battle, or commence a journey, without being loaded
with certain protecting charms, of which the most valuable are written
sentences sewed up in little bags. The _marabouts_ or priests sell
an immense number of verses from the Koran, for this purpose. When
major Denham was in Houssa, the women, having seen him write, came to
him in crowds to obtain amulets to restore their beauty, preserve the
affections of their lovers, and sometimes to destroy a rival. When the
Portuguese first attempted to establish their empire in Congo, they
found women of rank, who went about with dishevelled hair, beating
drums, and pretending to perform magical cures; and the women of
Loggum, who are said to be very intelligent, are still quite celebrated
for their skill in witchcraft.

The Africans are generally prejudiced against undertaking any thing on
Friday; if they are pursuing a journey, they will halt under a tree
and wait till that day is over. There are likewise certain animals
and objects, which if met unexpectedly are considered bad omens. An
annual festival, called the _tampcara_, is distinguished by a strange
superstitious custom. At this period a personage appears on the banks
of the Gambia, to whom they give the name of Tampcara. The natives
believe him to be a demon, and bestow without resistance whatever he
pleases to demand. He appears only in the night, but his door is at
all hours open to the women. Husbands dare not betray the slightest
symptoms of jealousy, for fear of incurring the awful displeasure of
Tampcara.

There is another pretended demon, called Mumbo Jumbo, whose mysteries
are celebrated in the night-time. Several nights previous to his
arrival, a great noise is heard in the adjoining woods. The men go
out to meet him, and find him with a stick in his hand, decorated in
a hideous and fantastic manner with the bark of trees. Preceded by a
band of music, he approaches the village, where the women ranged in a
circle fearfully await his arrival. Songs accompany the instruments,
and Mumbo Jumbo himself sings an air peculiar to the occasion. The most
profound silence follows. After a pause, Mumbo Jumbo points out those
women who have behaved improperly during the year. They are immediately
seized, tied to a post, and whipped by the mysterious visiter, with
more or less severity, according to the nature of their offence. All
the assembly join in shouts of derision, and the women are quite as
ready to take part against their sisters in disgrace as they are
accused of being in more civilized countries. When African wives are
refractory, it is a common threat to remind them of the annual visit of
Mumbo Jumbo, who will assuredly find out their faults and punish them
accordingly. The dress in which he usually appears is often kept hung
upon the trees, by way of admonition. This dreaded personage no doubt
receives his information from the husband or father of the culprit; but
the secret of the institution is so carefully preserved, that a king,
whose young wife had coaxed him to tell it, was afterward persuaded to
put all his wives to death to prevent discovery.

The following is the air sung by Mumbo Jumbo, as he enters a village:

                           [Music: MANDINGO

                          Air of Mumbo Jumbo

                              _Alle’tto._

                      _Fan na boo la o fa na ma o
                 ton sa boo la le fe no bi na ni a o_]

The Africans have a most terrific idea of the sea, which they always
call the big salt water. Some of the priests describe it as a malignant
deity, and forbid people to approach it. Beyond this big water they
suppose there is a land full of _white sea-monsters_, cannibals, and
sorcerers, who send to Africa and carry off great numbers of men,
women, and children, on purpose to devour them.

Poor Gustavus Vasa, who, with his little sister, was stolen while they
were at play, was exceedingly terrified at the sight of Europeans in a
vessel. “Where do these white monsters come from?” said he: “Do they
always live in these immense dens upon the water? How can they move
that great house, except by magic?”

The Africans consider our color quite as great a deformity as we regard
theirs. When Andanson entered a village at a little distance from the
coast, the children ran away screaming with terror; and it required
a great effort to persuade them to approach the white man, and touch
his long straight hair. Many of them suppose that the pale color of
Europeans is owing to a leprous disease. When Mungo Park was detained
at Benown, the king’s wives made him unbutton his waistcoat to show
his white skin; and even after they had counted his fingers and toes,
to ascertain that he was a human being, they could not refrain from
a shudder whenever they approached him. The king’s sons seriously
proposed to put out his eyes because they so much resembled a cat. The
wives of the Foulah king were more civil to the traveller, but they
found his features and color equally disagreeable. Mr. Park says: “As
soon as I entered, the whole seraglio surrounded me, some begging for
physic, others for amber, and all of them desirous of trying that great
African specific, blood-letting. They were ten or twelve in number,
most of them young and handsome. They rallied me with a good deal of
gayety on different subjects, particularly on the whiteness of my skin
and the prominence of my nose. They insisted that both were artificial.
The first they said was produced when I was an infant, by dipping me
in milk; and they insisted that my nose had been pinched every day
till it had acquired its present unsightly and unnatural conformation.
Without disputing my own deformity, I paid them many compliments on
African beauty. I praised the glossy jet of their skins, and the
lovely depression of their noses; but they told me that _honey-mouth_
was not esteemed in Bondu. In return, however, for my company, or my
compliments, to which they seemed not to be so insensible as they
affected to be, they presented me with a jar of honey and some fish,
which were sent to my lodging.”

The prejudice with regard to a white skin is not to be wondered at,
when we consider that nearly all the intercourse between Europe and
Africa has been for the purpose of obtaining slaves; and to this
circumstance must be added the natural tendency we all have to admire
what we are most accustomed to in our own friends.

Mungo Park feelingly describes the sufferings of some poor slaves
that belonged to a caravan with which he travelled. He says: “One of
the female slaves, named Nealee, began to lag behind, and complain
dreadfully of pains in her limbs. Her load was taken from her, and she
was ordered to keep in front of the caravan. About eleven o’clock, as
the party was resting by a small rivulet, a hive of bees, which had
been disturbed in a hollow tree, attacked the people and made them
fly in all directions. When the enemy had desisted from pursuit, and
all were employed in picking out the stings, it was discovered that
Nealee had not come up. She was found, very much exhausted, lying by
the rivulet, to which she had crept in hopes of defending herself from
the bees, by throwing water over her body; but she was stung in the
most dreadful manner. When the _slatees_[9] had picked out the stings
as well as they could, she was washed with water and then rubbed with
bruised leaves; but the wretched woman obstinately refused to proceed
any farther, declaring that she would rather die than walk another
step. As entreaties and threats were used in vain, the whip was at
length applied. After bearing patiently a few strokes, she started up,
and walked with tolerable expedition for four or five hours longer,
when she made an attempt to run away from the _coffle_, but was so
very weak that she soon fell down in the grass. Though she was unable
to rise, the whip was a second time employed, but without effect. They
tried to place her upon the ass which carried the provisions; but she
could not sit erect; and the animal being very refractory, it was found
impossible to carry her forward in that manner. The day’s journey was
nearly ended, and being unwilling to abandon her, they made a litter
of bamboo canes, and tied her on it with slips of bark. This litter
was carried on the heads of two slaves, followed by two more, who
relieved them occasionally. In this manner she was carried till the
caravan reached a stream of water, where they stopped for the night. At
daybreak poor Nealee was awakened; but her limbs were now so stiff and
painful that she could neither walk nor stand. She was therefore lifted
like a corpse upon the back of an ass; her hands fastened together
under the animal’s neck, and her feet under his belly, with long strips
of bark. But the ass was so very unruly, that no sort of treatment
could make him proceed with his load; and as Nealee made no exertion
to prevent herself from falling, she was quickly thrown off, and had
her limbs much bruised. The general cry of the coffle now was, ‘Cut her
throat--Cut her throat.’”

Mr. Park, not wishing to see this put in execution, hurried onward.
When he had walked about a mile, one of Karfa’s domestic slaves came
up with poor Nealee’s garment on the end of his bow, and exclaimed,
“Nealee is lost.” Mr. Park asked if the garment had been given him for
cutting her throat. He replied that Karfa would not consent to that
measure, and they had left her on the road. The helpless creature was
no doubt soon devoured by wild beasts.

Mr. Clapperton tells another painful story of a wretched slave mother,
who saw her child dashed on the ground, while she herself was compelled
by the lash to drag along her exhausted frame.

African mothers have an unbounded affection for their children. When
Mr. Park was at Wawra, and known to be on his way to Sego, several
women came and begged him to ask the king about their sons, who had
been taken away to the army. One declared that she had neither seen nor
heard of hers for several years; that he was no heathen, but said his
prayers daily; and that he was often the subject of her dreams.

At Jumbo the same traveller witnessed an affecting interview between
an African who had been long absent from home, and his relations. His
aged and blind mother, leaning on a staff, was led forth to meet him.
She stretched out her hands to welcome him, fondly stroked his hands,
arms, and face, and seemed delighted to hear once more the music of his
voice. Instances are likewise on record of mothers that have fallen
down dead on the sands, when they saw their children forced away in
slave ships.

When suffering the extremity of famine, mothers in the interior
sometimes sell their children to a wealthier neighbor, for the sake of
procuring food. But the domestic slavery of the Africans is altogether
of a milder character, and more resembles Hebrew servitude, than the
slavery existing among white men. Even the richest African lives in a
manner so simple and pastoral, that little toil is requisite to supply
his wants, and being a stranger to the love of accumulating wealth, he
has no temptation to work his laborers beyond their strength. The slave
and his master eat, drink, and work together in all the freedom of
uncivilized life; and the master can neither put a slave to death for
crime, or sell him to a stranger, without calling a public palaver, or
discussion, of the elders of the tribe.

The affection of parents is warmly reciprocated by their children.
An African will forgive any personal injury much more readily than a
disrespectful epithet applied to his parents. “Strike me, but do not
curse my mother!” is a common expression among them. Filial attachment
is less strong toward fathers than toward mothers; because paternal
love is weakened by being divided among the offspring of several
different wives.

In general, the fondness of African mothers is confined to the bodily
comfort of their children; but the Mandingoes extend their care to
the formation of moral character. A Mandingo woman whose son had
been mortally wounded by a Moor, wrung her hands in frantic grief,
continually repeating, “He never told a lie; no, never.”

The women of Madagascar probably love their children as tenderly as
other mothers, but with them superstition conquers nature, as it does
among the Hindoos. If a magician decides that the day of a child’s
birth is an unlucky one, parents endeavor to avert the supposed evil
destiny that awaits the infant, by putting a violent end to its
existence. Sometimes the innocent little creatures are left in a narrow
path, through which large herds of cattle are driven; and if it escape
without being trampled to death, it is supposed that the malignant
influence is removed. Sometimes a wooden vessel is filled with water,
and the babe’s face forcibly held in it, till it ceases to breathe;
sometimes it is laid face downward in a pit dug for its reception; and
sometimes a cloth is stuffed into its mouth until suffocation ensues.
Parents themselves generally perform the horrid office, strengthened by
the mistaken idea that there is no other way of saving the child from
the misery predicted for its future years.

The hospitality which generally characterizes a pastoral people
prevails in Africa. The blind are the only beggars ever seen. They
assemble in greater or less numbers and take their rounds in the
villages, singing verses from the Koran; and every one is ready to put
grain and other provisions into the bags which they carry slung at
their backs. The Seracolots are very remarkable for their hospitality.
When a vessel anchors near one of their villages, the whole crew are
abundantly and gratuitously furnished with every necessary; and when
a stranger enters one of their dwellings, the owner goes out of it,
saying, “White man, my house, my wife, my children, belong to thee.”
This is no unmeaning compliment; from that moment the guest does in
fact enjoy all the prerogatives of the master.

In cases where suspicion or fear led the men to treat Mungo Park with
neglect or rudeness, he always found women compassionate and kind.
When the chief of a Foulah village shut the door in his face, a poor
woman, who was spinning cotton in front of her hut, invited him in, and
gave him a plentiful dish of kouskous; and at another time when he sat
pensive and hungry by the road-side, unable to procure any food, an
old female slave stopped to ask whether he had any dinner; and being
informed that he had been robbed of every thing, she took the basket
of ground-nuts from her head, and with a benevolent look gave him a
few handfuls. The weary traveller was about to thank her for this
seasonable relief, but she walked away before he had time.

One tempestuous night the same daring adventurer, hungry, destitute,
and disheartened, took shelter for the night under a tree. A Bambarra
woman, returning from the labors of the field, inquired why he looked
so sad; and when she learned his situation she took up his saddle and
bridle, and bade him follow her. She conducted him to her hut, lighted
a lamp, spread a mat for him to sit upon, broiled a fish for his
supper, and gave him to understand that he might lie down and sleep
without interruption. While he rested, the women in the hut resumed
their spinning, an employment which had been for a while interrupted
by their surprise at seeing a white man. As they worked, they sung an
extempore song, of which the traveller was the subject.

    The winds roared, and the rains fell;
    The poor white man, faint and weary,
    Came and sat under our tree.
    He has no mother to bring him milk,
    No wife to grind his corn.


CHORUS.

    Let us pity the white man;
    No mother has he to bring him milk,
    No wife to grind his corn.

The air was sweet and plaintive, and the kind sentiments it conveyed
affected Mr. Park so deeply that he could not sleep. In the morning, he
gave his landlady two of the four brass buttons that remained on his
waistcoat; these were all he had to offer to signify his gratitude.

“In all my wanderings and wretchedness,” says this enlightened
traveller, “I found women uniformly kind and compassionate; and I
can truly say, as my predecessor, Mr. Ledyard, has said before me:
‘To a woman I never addressed myself in the language of decency and
friendship without receiving a decent and friendly answer. If I was
hungry or thirsty, wet, or sick, they did not hesitate, like the men,
to perform a generous action. In so free and so kind a manner did
they contribute to my relief, that if I was dry, I drank the sweetest
draught, and if hungry, I ate the coarsest morsel, with a double
relish.’”

An Arab widow at Houssa became very much enamored with captain
Clapperton, and he found some difficulty in ridding himself of her
suit. According to Moorish custom, her eyebrows were dyed black, her
hair blue, her hands and feet red, and her huge person was loaded with
necklaces, girdles, and bracelets. In order still farther to tempt
the European, she displayed to him an additional store of finery, and
carried him through several rooms, one of which was ornamented with
pewter dishes and bright brass pans. After these preliminaries, she
proposed to send forthwith for a priest to unite their destinies. The
captain stammered out the best apology he could, and hurried away. She
followed him to a neighboring village, sitting astride on a very fine
horse, with scarlet housings trimmed with lace. She wore a red silk
mantle and morocco boots, and a multitude of spells sewed in various
colored leather were hung around her. Her drummer was decorated in
ostrich feathers, and a train of armed attendants followed her. It was
rumored that she intended to make herself queen, and invite captain
Clapperton to share the throne of Wawa. Her wealth and the influence
she might enable him to obtain, for a moment tempted him; and as the
widow had induced his servant Pascoe to take a wife from among her
slaves, she had, according to African ideas, acquired some right to
himself; but he soon directed Pascoe to return his wife, and thus
destroy her remaining hopes. “It would indeed have been a fine end of
my journey,” says he, “if I had deposed old Mohammed, and set up for
myself, with this walking tun butt for a queen.”

One of Bonaparte’s officers, named Duranton, expatriated himself at the
time France was conquered by foreign arms, and entered into commercial
relations in Africa. He finally went as far into the interior as Kasso,
where he adopted the language and habits of the natives. By his bravery
and knowledge he soon gained unbounded influence. The king had an
only daughter, about sixteen, whom her countrymen esteemed beautiful.
Duranton, notwithstanding the prejudice against his complexion, was
pleasing to the young damsel. He married her, and was soon after
elected king of Kasso. He has extended the commerce of the tribe, but
attempted no innovation upon their ancient customs. He eats, dresses,
and sits after the manner of the natives, and observes precisely the
same sort of etiquette that was maintained by his father-in-law.

On the coasts of Africa, where the natives have frequent intercourse
with European sailors, they are exceedingly licentious and depraved.

According to Bruce’s description, the Abyssinian women are grossly
familiar in their manners; at a village on the banks of the Gambia, the
women were likewise guilty of very rude freedoms. They troubled Mr.
Park exceedingly, begging for amber, beads, &c., and boldly proceeding
to tear his clothes, in order to secure the buttons. He mounted his
horse and rode off; but they followed him for more than a mile, trying
to renew their outrages.

The women of Loggun are described by major Denham as intelligent,
handsome, and lively; but their freedoms were not of the most delicate
character, and they tried to pilfer every thing they could lay hands
on. When detected they laughed, and called out to each other how sharp
the traveller was in finding out their tricks.

Captain Clapperton makes great complaints of the loquacity of the
women. He says they convinced him that no power, not even African
despotism, can silence a woman’s tongue. According to his own
testimony, however, their love of talk originated in mere childish
curiosity, and was indulged with the kindest intentions.

In Walo, the crown is hereditary, but always descends to the eldest son
of the king’s sister; and among several other tribes a man’s property
is always inherited by the offspring of his sister, according to the
custom of the Nairs of Hindostan. This circumstance does not indicate
any great confidence in the character of women.

It has been said that the Africans are generally indolent; and when
compared with the busy, restless sons of ambition and avarice, this
is no doubt true. The soil is prolific and easy of cultivation; their
wants are very few and simple; and they have not the slightest desire
for the accumulation of wealth. During the few months which it is
necessary to devote to agricultural pursuits, they are so busy that
they scarcely allow themselves time for sleep; and the rest of the year
they give up to child-like merriment.

The African race, as distinguished from the Arabs or Moors, are
faithful, affectionate, sensitive in their feelings, and liable to
almost instantaneous changes from gloom to gayety, according to the
circumstances in which they are placed. When in the greatest misery, a
kind look or word will animate them, as it does the heart of a little
child; but when their cup of suffering is full, the “drop too much”
which tyranny seeks to add to the bitter measure, often arouses them
to fierce and desperate fury. In a state of freedom they are almost
universally gentle, inquisitive, credulous, and fond of flattery.

Barrow speaks thus of the Kaffers: “A party of women were the first
who advanced to salute us, laughing and dancing round the wagons, and
putting on all the coaxing manners they could invent, in order to
procure from us tobacco and brass buttons. Good temper, animation,
and a cheerful turn of mind, beamed in all their countenances. We
found them to be modest without reserve; extremely curious without
being troublesome; lively but not impudent; and sportive without the
least shadow of being lascivious. The most striking feature in their
character was a degree of sprightliness, activity, and vivacity, that
distinguished them from the women of most uncivilized nations, who are
generally reserved toward strangers.”

The African laws are simple and rude, like their habits; but it appears
from the accounts of travellers that widows retain peaceable possession
of their property, and are able to transact business with perfect
security. This implies a degree of good order in society, which one
would not expect to find in uncivilized states.

In most of the tribes on the southern and western coast of Africa,
women do not inherit the property of their fathers, either real or
personal.

Among the Wolofs when a young man wishes to marry, he signifies it
to the parents of the girl, who meet him at some public place in the
village. When the young couple are surrounded by a circle of relatives,
the man offers as much gold or merchandise, oxen or slaves, as he can
afford to pay. The girl’s consent is not necessary for the completion
of the bargain; but if she refuses to fulfil the promise of her
parents, she can never marry another; should she attempt to do so, the
first lover can claim her as his slave. As soon as the parties have
agreed upon the price, the young man pays the required sum; and the
same evening the bride is conveyed to the bridegroom’s hut, by a troop
of relations and friends. On these occasions she always wears a white
veil of her own weaving. The rejoicings continue for eight days, during
which the guests are abundantly supplied with palm wine and other
liquors.

Among the Sereres, when a lover has formally obtained the consent
of relations, he summons his friends to assist him in carrying off
the object of his choice. The bride shuts herself up in a hut with
her companions, where they maintain an obstinate siege before they
surrender to the assailants.

In Bambuk, the bride is escorted to the hut of her future husband. When
she arrives at the door, she takes off her sandals, and a calabash of
water is placed in her hand. She knocks, and the door is opened by the
relations of the bridegroom, who remains seated in the midst of the
hut. The bride kneels before him, pours the water over his feet, and
wipes them with her mantle, in token of submission.

Mr. Park speaks of seeing a betrothed girl at Baniseribe, who knelt
before her lover, and presenting a calabash of water, desired him to
wash his hands; when he had done so, she drank the water, apparently
with delight; this being considered a great proof of fidelity and love.
In Madagascar, wives salute their husbands just returned from war, by
passing the tongue over his feet, in the most respectful manner.

Among the Mandingoes, when the lover has settled the bargain with the
girl’s parents, she is covered with the bridal veil of white cotton,
and seated on a mat, with all the elderly women of the neighborhood
ranged in a circle round her. They give her sage instructions
concerning the performance of her duties and the propriety of her
deportment as a matron. A band of female _guiriots_ come in and disturb
their serious lessons with music, singing, and dancing. The bridegroom
in the mean time entertains his friends without doors. A plentiful
supper is provided, and the evening is devoted to mirth. Before
midnight the bride is privately conducted by her female relatives to
the hut which is to be her future residence. The bridal party generally
continue dancing and singing until broad daylight.

At the island of St. Louis, the native women often contract a sort
of limited marriage with Europeans, and their vows are said to be
generally observed with exemplary fidelity. They take the Portuguese
title of Signora, and the children receive the name of their father.
The bridal ceremonies are similar to the Wolofs. When the European
husband leaves the country, he provides for his family according to his
wealth, and the generosity of his character; and his wife is at liberty
to marry again when she pleases.

In Congo, marriage is sometimes consecrated with Catholic ceremonies,
by the converts to Christianity; but the pagan natives preserve the
simplicity of their ancient forms. When a young man has selected
a damsel that pleases him, he sends presents to her relatives,
accompanied by a cup of palm wine. If the presents are accepted, and
the wine drank, it is considered a sign of approbation. He visits
the parents, and having received his bride from their hands, conducts
her to his own house. Here she remains, till he is satisfied with
regard to her temper, industry, and general propriety of deportment.
Sometimes this season of probation lasts one year, and sometimes two
or three. If either party becomes dissatisfied with the other, they
separate, without any loss of reputation; but if mutually pleased,
they signify it publicly to friends and relations, and the event is
celebrated by a feast. The Portuguese missionaries made a strong effort
to abolish this custom; but the people were much attached to it; and
mothers universally declared they would not subject themselves to the
reproaches of their daughters, by urging them to an indissoluble union
with individuals, whose tempers and dispositions they had never seen
tried.

In Abyssinia there is no form of marriage, except what consists in a
mutual consent to live together as long as they please each other.
This connection is dissolved and renewed as often as the parties
think proper. From the highest to the lowest rank, no distinction is
made between legitimate and illegitimate children. The women, though
Mohammedans, appear freely in public; and the master of a family
considers it a point of civility to offer his wife or sister to a
guest. The celebrated queen of Sheba is supposed to have been an
Abyssinian; and the monarchs now claim descent from Menilek, who they
say was her son by Solomon, king of the Jews.

In Caffraria, the bridal ceremonies are so simple as scarcely to
deserve the name. When young people wish to live together, opposition
from parents is almost an unheard-of circumstance. A feast is prepared
to give publicity to the event, and they eat, drink, and dance, for
days or weeks in succession, according to the wealth of the parties. If
a Caffer girl marries during the lifetime of her father, she receives
for dowry as many cattle as he can afford to give; but after his death,
she is dependent on the generosity of her brothers. As a wife costs an
ox, or two cows, it is rare for any but wealthy Caffers to have more
than one. Twins are said to be more common than in any other country,
and three children at a birth is a frequent occurrence.

An African dowry is sometimes furnished in a manner painful to think
upon. When the sultan of Mandara married his daughter to an Arab
sheik, “the nuptials were celebrated by a great slave hunt among the
mountains, when, after a dreadful struggle, three thousand captives, by
their tears and bondage, furnished out the materials of a magnificent
marriage festival.”

In Dahomey, all the unmarried females, throughout the kingdom, are
considered the property of the despotic sovereign. Once a year they
are all brought before him; he selects the most engaging for himself,
and sells the others at high prices to his subjects. No choice is
allowed the purchaser. He pays twenty thousand cowries, and receives
such a wife as the king pleases to appoint; being obliged to appear
satisfied with the selection, whatever may be her aspect or condition.
It is said that some have, in mockery, been presented with their own
mothers. This brutal and bloody sovereign usually keeps as many as
three thousand wives, who serve him in various capacities. No person
is allowed to sit even on the floor in the royal presence, except his
women; and they must kiss the ground whenever they receive or deliver
a message from the king. These women are watched with the most savage
jealousy.

Mr. M’Leod, who visited Dahomey in 1803, had his compassion much
excited by the sudden disappearance of Sally Abson, daughter of the
late English governor by a native female. This girl, who had been
educated in the European manner, was accomplished, and had a most
winning simplicity of manner. Mr. M’Leod could obtain no tidings of her
for a long time. But at last an old domestic ventured to tell him that
she had been carried off by an armed band, in the night-time, to be
enrolled among the king’s women.

The king of Ashantee has three thousand three hundred and thirty-three
wives; a mystical number, on which the prosperity of the nation is
supposed to depend.

The king of Yarriba boasted to captain Clapperton, that his wives
linked hand in hand would reach entirely across his kingdom. The first
question asked by the chiefs was, how many wives the king of England
had; and when told that he had but one, they would burst into loud
peals of laughter, accompanied by expressions of surprise and pity.

These numerous queens are, however, in fact, nothing but servants, and
valued only as an indication of power and wealth. Beside forming a
military guard for the king, they labor in the fields, bring water, and
carry heavy burdens on their heads, just like the wives of the poorest
subject.

The pagan Africans are formally married but to one wife; but they take
as many mistresses as they can maintain, and send them away when they
please. The lawful wife, provided she has children, has authority
over all the female members of the household, and her children enjoy
privileges superior to the rest; but if she is so unfortunate as not to
be a mother, she is not considered as the head of the establishment.

The women belonging to one household generally live very peaceably.
Each one takes her turn in cooking and other domestic avocations; and
the husband is expected to be equally kind, generous, and attentive to
all.

A _slatee_, with whom Mr. Park entered Kamalia, brought with him a
young girl as his fourth wife, for whom he had given her parents three
slaves. His other wives received her at the door very kindly, and
conducted her into one of the best huts, which they had caused to be
swept and whitewashed on purpose for her reception.

Dissensions, it is said, do sometimes occur, and the husband finds it
necessary to administer a little chastisement before tranquillity is
restored.

Unfaithfulness to the marriage vow is said to be very rare among the
Mandingoes and the Kaffers. Throughout Africa this crime in a woman
is punished by being sold into slavery; but the punishment cannot be
arbitrarily and immediately inflicted by the husband, as is the case
in many Asiatic countries; it is necessary to call a public palaver,
or discussion, upon the subject. The price of a woman condemned for
this vice is divided between the king and his grandees; it is therefore
probable that they keep rather a strict watch upon the morality of
their female subjects. Sometimes the paramour is likewise sentenced
to be sold into slavery; sometimes he receives a severe flogging,
amid the shouts and laughter of the multitude; and not unfrequently
he is murdered by the abused husband. In this latter case, unless the
murderer can buy a pardon from his prince, he is obliged to seek refuge
in some other kingdom, where he falls at the feet of some rich person,
and voluntarily acknowledges himself a slave; but he can never be sold,
and is in fact regarded as one of the family. It frequently happens
that the whole family of the culprit are obliged to flee their country,
to avoid being sold into slavery for the crime of their relative.

The _marabouts_ always marry among each other; and as the children
follow the profession of their fathers, there are whole villages of
these priests. They obtain great influence by being able to write
verses of the Koran, and administer very simple medicinal remedies.
They consider it a sacred obligation to ransom all persons of their own
profession from slavery.

The ties of domestic affection are said to be peculiarly strong among
the Shouaa Arabs, who reside in tents near the central part of Africa.
When their chief learned that major Denham had been three years absent
from home, he said, “Are not your eyes dimmed with straining to the
north, where all your thoughts must be? If my eyes do not see the wife
and children of my heart for ten days, they are flowing with tears
when they should be closed in sleep.” His parting salutation to the
traveller was, “May you die at your own tents, and in the arms of your
wife and family.”

In some cases wealthy Africans do not avail themselves of the universal
custom of polygamy. Barrow thus describes the Kaffer prince, Gaika: “At
the time I saw him, he was under twenty years of age, of an elegant
form, and a graceful and manly deportment; his face of a deep bronze
color, nearly approaching to black; his skin soft and smooth; his eyes
dark brown, and full of animation; his teeth regular, well set, and
pure as the whitest ivory. He had the appearance of possessing in an
eminent degree a solid understanding, a clear head, and an amiable
disposition. He seemed to be adored by his subjects; the name of Gaika
was in every mouth, and it was seldom pronounced without symptoms of
joy. He had only one wife, who was very young, and, setting aside the
prejudice against color, very pretty.”

The French traveller Brue says the women on the banks of the Senegal
appeared to consider the condition of European wives very enviable,
and expressed great compassion for him in being separated from his
only wife without the power of marrying another. When Dr. Lichtenstein
visited Latakoo, the women were, as usual, very curious about the
Christian custom of having but one wife. The queen approved the system,
but she thought polygamy was necessary in Africa, because such numbers
of the men were killed in war.

Infants of a few hours old are washed in cold water and laid on a mat,
with no other covering than a cotton cloth thrown loosely over them.

In twelve or fifteen days the mothers carry them about, suspended at
their backs, by means of the _pagne_ or mantle, which they fasten
around the hips, and over one shoulder. Infants are kept in this
situation nearly the whole day, while the women are busy at their
various avocations. They are nursed until they are able to walk;
sometimes until three years old. A few tumbles, or similar trifling
accidents, are not considered worthy of much anxiety or commiseration.
Till ten or twelve years old, children wear no clothing, and do
nothing but run about and sport on the sands. Those who live near the
sea-shore, are continually plunging into the water; in consequence of
which scarcely any disease appears among them, except the small-pox.
A child receives its name when it is eight days old. A sort of paste,
called _dega_, is prepared for the occasion, and the priest recites
prayers over it. He takes the babe in his arms, invokes the blessing of
heaven upon it, whispers a few words in its ear, spits three times in
its face, pronounces aloud the name that is given to it, and returns it
to the mother. He then divides the consecrated _dega_ among the guests,
and if any person be sick, he sends them some of it. A similar custom
prevails in the Barbary states.

The moment an African ceases to breathe, his wife runs out of the hut,
beating her breast, tearing her hair, and summoning her neighbors by
loud cries. Friends and relatives soon assemble in the hut, and join in
her lamentations, continually repeating, “Woe is me!”

When the marabouts have rubbed the corpse with oil and covered it with
cloths, each person goes up and addresses it, as if still living. In a
few minutes they go away, saying, “He is dead;” the lamentations are
renewed, and continue till the next day, when the burial takes place.
Major Denham speaks of hearing the Dugganah women singing funeral
dirges all night long in honor of their husbands, who had fallen in
battle. These dirges were prepared for the occasion, and were so solemn
and plaintive, that they could not be listened to without the deepest
sympathy.

The body is conveyed to the grave in straw mats. Women hired for
the occasion follow it with loud shrieks, and the most extravagant
demonstrations of sorrow. They return howling to the hut, where they
pronounce an eulogium on the deceased. If they perform their parts
well, they are complimented by relations, and are treated with palm
wine, or other spirituous liquors. For eight days in succession
these women go to the grave at sunrise and sunset, and renew their
lamentations, saying, “Hadst thou not wives, and arms, and horses, and
pipes, and tobacco? Wherefore then didst thou leave us?”

The relations and friends of the deceased remain in seclusion with his
widow eight days, to console her grief.

The Abyssinian women wound their faces while they lament for the dead.
In Congo, the relatives shave their heads, anoint their bodies, and rub
them with dust, during the eight days of mourning. They consider it
very indecorous for a widow to join in any festivity for the space of
one year after her husband’s death.

In Dahomey and Ashantee, wives, and slaves of both sexes, often one
hundred in number, are slaughtered at the death of the king, from the
idea that he will need their attendance in another world; and every
year, at least one human being and many animals are killed “to water
the graves” of the royal family. The government of Yarriba is more mild
and paternal; but it is the custom for a few of the king’s favorite
wives, and some of his principal ministers, to take poison, which is
presented to them in parrots’ eggs, in order that they may go to serve
his majesty in the world of spirits.

Fragrant flowers and a quantity of gold are sometimes buried with
people of rank, for their use in another world. On the death of a young
girl, the body is washed, anointed with palm oil, decorated in all
her finery, and laid upon a bed; her companions join in a dance around
her; and when this ceremony is concluded, she is buried in her best
clothes. The graves are covered with little mounds of straw, on which a
lance, bow, and arrow are placed for the men, and a mortar and pestle
for a woman. The solemnities always conclude with a feast, at which the
guiriots dance, while all join in singing the praises of the deceased.

The Africans, like the Asiatics, do not use knives or forks. All eat
from a wooden bowl, which is placed on a mat, or low stool, in the
middle of the hut. The women seldom eat until the men have done. After
the repast a woman brings a calabash of water, and offers it to each of
the guests, for the purpose of washing his hands and mouth. In Tesee
the women are not allowed to eat eggs, though the men eat them without
scruple. It is not known in what the custom originated, but nothing
will affront a woman of that country so much as to offer her an egg.

In Congo, people of rank are often carried by slaves in a sort of
hammock swung upon poles, which is frequently protected from the sun by
an awning thrown over it. Women in all parts of Africa are often seen
riding on asses or oxen. They guide the latter by means of a string
passed through a ring in the nose; and they sometimes manage to make
these quiet beasts curvet and caper.

Apes, baboons, and monkeys, are exceedingly numerous in Africa. A woman
of the country of Galam, who was carrying some milk and millet to sell
in a neighboring village, was attacked by a troop of apes from three
to four feet high. They threw stones at her, and holding her fast,
beat her with sticks, until she dropped the vessel she was carrying.
She returned home much bruised, and the men formed a hunting party,
which killed ten of the savage animals, and wounded several others; not
however without getting sundry bites and bruises during the encounter.

The Hottentot race seem to be distinct from all other people, and
surpassing all others, even the Calmucks, in ugliness. The eyes are
long, narrow, and distant from each other; the eyelids do not form an
angle at the extremity near the nose, but are formed in a manner very
similar to the Chinese; their cheek bones are very high and prominent,
and form nearly a triangle with the narrow pointed chin; the complexion
is yellowish brown, like an autumn leaf; the hair grows in small tufts
at certain distances from each other; when kept short, the head looks
like a hard shoe-brush, but when suffered to grow, it hangs in the neck
in a sort of hard twisted fringe. An old Hottentot woman is said to be
a most uncouth and laughable figure; some parts of the body being very
lank, and others jutting out in huge protuberances of loose flesh. The
letter S gives the best idea of the curvature of their forms. The habit
of throwing the breast over the shoulder, in order to enable infants
to nurse while swinging at their backs, contributes not a little to
increase their deformity. Yet some of the women, when very young,
are said to be perfect models of beauty in the female form. Every
joint and limb is well turned and proportioned, and the hands and feet
are remarkably small and delicate, though they never wear shoes, or
sandals. Their charms, however, endure but a very short time. They are
old at thirty; and long before that time, their shape assumes those
strange and disgusting disproportions, for which it seems difficult to
account.

In their state of slavery they have suffered great cruelties from their
masters, the Dutch boors of South Africa. The lands and flocks, of
which their fathers had been in peaceful and happy possession, were
wrested from them; they were compelled to labor without compensation;
allowed scarcely food enough to support life; mangled with tough, heavy
whips of the sea-cow’s hide; and sometimes, for the slightest offences,
chained to a post, while shot was fired into their naked limbs. These
Dutch tyrants introduced a singular degree of luxurious refinement into
their mode of despotism; they did not, according to the usual custom of
slave-owners, order their offending vassals to receive a certain number
of lashes, but directions were given to flog them while their master or
mistress lazily smoked out one, two, three, or four pipes.

Under these circumstances, the simple, kind-hearted Hottentots became
servile, degraded, and wretched to the last degree. Unlike all others
of the colored race, they were always gloomy and dejected, being
rarely excited even to a languid smile. Their indolence was so great
that they would fast a whole day rather than dig a root, if they
might only be allowed to sleep. The natural color of their bodies was
concealed by an accumulation of grease and soot, and their habits were
so filthy that the description would be disgusting. Though strong in
their attachment to each other, they were generally disinclined to
marriage.

The situation in which women were placed,--being originally ignorant
savages, and afterward completely in the power of masters, whose
policy it was to brutalize them,--of course precluded all possibility
of morality or modesty. In fact the immortal part of man seemed
extinguished in the Hottentots, and they appeared to be altogether like
the beasts of the field.

The bit of sheep-skin which they wear for clothing scarcely answers
the purposes of decency, and with them it is entirely a matter of
indifference whether it does or not. The women wear a small leather
apron, seven or eight inches wide, which it is their delight to
decorate with beads, shells, or large metal buttons. If in addition to
this they can obtain beads for the neck, and copper rings for the arms,
they experience as much delight as can possibly be felt by people of
such a phlegmatic temperament. Those who cannot afford beads and shells
wear leather necklaces and bracelets, and cover themselves with a piece
of sheep-skin, cut into narrow strips, which hang in a bunch about half
way to the knee. The rattling of this hard dry skin announces the
approach of a Hottentot woman some time before she appears. In winter,
they defend themselves from the cold by means of a sheep-skin cloak
over the shoulders; and some wear skin caps on their heads, ornamented
as their rude fancy dictates. Fragments of a looking-glass, to fasten
in their caps, or among their hair, are considered as precious as
diamonds with us.

The habit of greasing their bodies probably originated, as it did in
other warm climates, in the scarcity of water, and the necessity of
some protection from the rays of the sun. Barrow suggests that this
practice introduced into South America would prove a salutary check to
the prevalence of that loathsome disorder called the elephantiasis.

When a Hottentot wishes to marry, he drives two or three of his best
oxen or sheep to the house of the bride’s relations, accompanied by as
many friends as he can collect together. The animals are slain, and the
whole assembly rub themselves with the fat. The men sit in a circle
round the bridegroom, and the women round the bride. A blessing is
then pronounced on the young couple, which principally consists in the
hope that their sons will be expert huntsmen, and prove a comfort to
their old age. A feast is then prepared, and when they have all eaten
voraciously, a pipe is lighted, of which each one smokes a few whiffs,
and then passes it to his neighbor. Feasting is sometimes kept up for
several days; but they have no music or dancing. Men and women always
eat separately.

When an infant is born, they rub it gently with fresh cow-dung,
believing it to possess certain medicinal qualities; they then bruise
the stalks of wild figs and wash the child in the juice; and when this
is dry, fat, or butter, is liberally applied. After this the parents
give it a name, which is generally the appellation of some favorite
animal. A feast is given, of which all the inhabitants of the kraal, or
village, partake, except the mother, who receives some of the fat for
the use of herself and child.

Large numbers of the Hottentot women are childless, and a family of six
is considered a wonderful prodigy.

The half European and half Hottentot children are remarkably vigorous
and healthy, and become tall, well-proportioned men and women. This
mixed race, somewhat remarkable for brightness and activity, seem
likely to supplant the natives entirely.

It rarely happens that a Hottentot woman has twins, but when this
is the case one of them is barbarously exposed in the woods, to be
starved, or devoured by wild beasts, as the case may be. Very old
people are sometimes exposed in the same way. All the other African
tribes are distinguished for great respect and tenderness toward the
aged.

When the Hottentot boys are eighteen years old, they are formally
admitted into the society of men. The company of women, even that of
their own mothers, is ever after considered a disgrace to them; and
being released from all maternal authority, they not unfrequently beat
their mothers and sisters, merely to show manly independence.

The women howl and lament for the dead, in the same manner that
prevails in other portions of the continent.

A Hottentot kraal, or village, consists of a circle of low dirty
huts, which at a little distance resemble a cluster of bee-hives. The
employments of the women are such as generally fall to their lot in a
savage state. A great many of them are slaves to the Dutch boors, and
of course perform all their most menial and laborious occupations.
Their patience and fortitude under suffering are truly wonderful.

Low as the Hottentots are in the scale of humanity, they are by no
means destitute of good and agreeable qualities. They are very mild,
inoffensive, open-hearted, honest, and grateful. Their affection for
each other is so strong, that they will at any moment share their
last morsel of food with a distressed companion; and they very seldom
quarrel, or speak unkindly to their associates. They seem to be
entirely destitute of cunning, and when they have committed a fault
rarely fail to tell of it with the utmost simplicity.

M. Vaillant says: “They are the best, the kindest, and the most
hospitable of people. Whoever travels among them may be sure of finding
food and lodging; and though they will receive presents, they never
ask for any thing. If they learn that the traveller has a long journey
to accomplish, they will supply him with provisions as far as their
circumstances will allow, and with every thing else necessary to
enable him to reach the place of his destination. Such did these people
appear to me, in all the innocent manners of pastoral life. They excite
the idea of mankind in a state of infancy.”

The Hernhüters, or Moravian missionaries, have had a most blessed
influence on this poor persecuted race. These missionaries cultivate
gardens and fields in the neatest manner, and are themselves engaged
in various mechanical trades. The Hottentots by kindness and punctual
wages are induced to come and work for them, and the good fathers are
ever ready to instruct them in agriculture and the mechanical arts.
In 1824, nearly two thousand Hottentots lived in small huts, under
the protecting influence of the missionaries, each one cultivating a
little patch of ground to raise vegetables for his family. Some of them
employed their leisure moments in making mats and brooms, while others
obtained a comfortable subsistence by the sale of poultry, eggs, and
cattle.

Three hundred of their children attended Sunday school; and they
contributed five hundred six dollars to the missionary establishment
by voluntary subscriptions. Under the fostering care of true-hearted,
humble Christians, their habits of indolence and filth disappeared, and
they became distinguished for industry and cleanliness. By the last
accounts, about sixty Hottentots were communicants of the church.

Barrow, who visited the establishment in 1798, says: “Early one morning
I was awakened by the noise of some of the finest voices I ever heard,
and looking out saw a group of female Hottentots sitting on the ground.
It was Sunday, and they had assembled thus early to chant the morning
hymn. They were all neatly dressed in printed cotton gowns. A sight
so different from what we had hitherto observed, with regard to this
unhappy class of beings, could not fail of being most grateful.”

“On Sundays, they all regularly attend divine service, and it is
astonishing how ambitious they are to appear at church neat and clean.
Of the three hundred, or thereabouts, that composed the congregation,
about half were dressed in printed cottons. Their deportment was truly
devout. One of the fathers delivered a discourse replete with good
sense, and well suited to the occasion; tears flowed abundantly from
the eyes of those to whom it was particularly addressed. The females
sung in a plaintive and affecting style; and the voices were in general
sweet and harmonious.”

The Dutch had always excused their own tyranny by saying that their
unfortunate victims could not possibly be raised above the level of
brutes; and they manifested extreme jealousy of the influence of the
Gospel, because it bringeth light and freedom. The same spirit, which
always led them to place the poor Hottentot in the worst possible
point of view, likewise induced them to represent the amiable and
generous Kaffers as a savage, treacherous, and cruel tribe. Yet they
knew perfectly well that the Kaffers had shown a remarkable degree of
moderation toward the white colonists; and that in the midst of a war,
into which they had been driven by a series of iniquitous persecutions,
they spared the lives of all the Dutch women and children that fell
into their hands, though their own wives and children were murdered by
the Dutch without mercy.

In 1828 the British government relieved the Hottentots from their
grievous thraldom, and at once bestowed upon them all the privileges of
citizens. The change from slavery to freedom produces the effect that
would naturally be expected by any one who had observed human nature
attentively. This long oppressed race are fast improving in health,
cleanliness, industry, and respectability.

The Bojesmans, or Bushmen, are wild Hottentots, who have always
preserved their independence, though under circumstances of the
extremest misery and want. In personal appearance they very much
resemble the Hottentots, but are more diminutive and ugly. The
colonists call them Chinese Hottentots, on account of the peculiar
position and formation of the eyes and eyelids. Their customs and modes
of life bear a general resemblance to those of their more submissive
brethren; but, unlike them, they are very cheerful, active, and
industrious. Both men and women spring from rock to rock, like wild
antelopes, and their motions are so swift that a horseman finds it
impossible to keep up with them on uneven ground. Although their scanty
subsistence is earned with great danger and fatigue, they are always
merry.

The deadly animosity of the Dutch settlers makes it necessary for
them to remain concealed in their hovels among the rocks all day;
but on moonlight nights, they come out and dance from the setting of
the sun to its rising. They consider the first thunder storm as a
sure indication that winter has passed away, and testify their joy by
tearing off their sheep-skin coverings, and tossing them high up in the
air. On these occasions, they dance for several successive nights. The
circular places trodden around their huts indicate their fondness for
this amusement.

The women usually wear a piece of antelope’s skin cut into filaments,
after the manner of the other Hottentots; and like them they are
entirely unconscious of any shame in being without even this scanty
covering. Some of them wear caps made of ass’ skin, and bits of copper
or shells suspended in the neck from their little tufts of hair. It
is customary for elderly men to have two wives, one old and the other
young. These poor creatures have such a dread of white men, that Mr.
Barrow could hardly tempt the little children to come down the rocks
toward his party, to receive the biscuits he held out to them. The
mothers, finding their little ones were treated kindly, ventured to
approach; and when they had received a few trifling presents, forty
or fifty women and girls came down without any symptoms of fear. But
the women went backward and forward a dozen times, with invitations
and presents of tobacco, before one man could be prevailed upon to
descend; and when he did, he half cried, half laughed, and trembled
like a frightened child.

The Gonaquas are a tribe of unsubdued Hottentots, taller than the
Bojesmans, but resembling them in personal appearance. The women
generally paint the whole body with compartments of red and black.
The red is an ochrey earth, the color of brick-dust, and the black
is either soot or charcoal, mixed with grease. To finish this
embellishment in approved style is a tedious process. Some content
themselves with merely painting the cheeks. These colors are always
perfumed with a powder called _boughou_, the smell of which is very
disagreeable to those who are unused to it; but the Hottentots are so
fond of it, that they will sometimes give a lamb for a thimble full of
_boughou_. The men paint only the upper lip; by means of which they
continually inhale the fragrance. When young girls consent to perform
this office for their lovers, it is considered a very endearing proof
of affection. These women are very fond mothers. Their principal
occupations are cooking, taking care of their children, and making
garments and vessels of the skins of animals sewed with sinews. Their
aprons and cloaks are usually made of calf skins, and are longer and
larger than those worn by other Hottentots. As soon as milk is taken
from the cow, it is put in a leather sack with the hairy side inwards,
and suffered to ferment; for, like the Arabs, they have a dislike to
sweet milk.

The Dutch women at the Cape are excessively ignorant, tyrannical, lazy,
and fat; the inevitable consequence of having slaves to do every
species of labor, while they themselves indulge in great profusion of
animal food. An old Dutch African woman is said to be as laughable a
figure as an old Hottentot; one being as large and uninterruptedly
round as a hogshead, and the other characterized by uncouth projections
of the body. The young Dutch girls at the Cape are said to be much
superior to their clumsy, awkward brothers. They are generally small
and well formed, with social, unaffected manners. A few of the higher
class are tolerable proficients in music, French, and English, and have
considerable skill in lace and various kinds of needle-work. They copy
with much eagerness the English fashions that are brought to them, from
time to time, by ladies bound for India.

Sons and daughters share equally in the paternal inheritance, and an
entire community of property, both real and personal, takes place
at the marriage of two persons, unless provided against by a formal
contract before the wedding.

                            [Illustration]


FOOTNOTES:

[7] A kind of pudding made of millet.

[8] A black Mohammedan priest.

[9] Black traders who go from the coast to the interior for articles of
merchandise, of which slaves constitute a large portion.




                          Transcriber’s Note

A few minor punctuation and spelling errors have been silently
corrected. All other creative spellings were left per the original.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY OF THE CONDITION OF WOMEN IN VARIOUS AGES AND NATIONS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Hand-Book of Practical Cookery, for Ladies and Professional Cooks
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Hand-Book of Practical Cookery, for Ladies and Professional Cooks

Author: Pierre Blot


        
Release date: March 21, 2011 [eBook #35646]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/35646

Credits: Produced by Marcia Brooks, Ross Cooling and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Canada Team at
        http://www.pgdpcanada.net (This file was produced from
        images generously made available by The Internet
        Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAND-BOOK OF PRACTICAL COOKERY, FOR LADIES AND PROFESSIONAL COOKS ***




Produced by Marcia Brooks, Ross Cooling and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Canada Team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
Archive/American Libraries.)









  HAND-BOOK

  OF

  PRACTICAL COOKERY,

  FOR

  LADIES AND PROFESSIONAL COOKS.

  CONTAINING

  _THE WHOLE SCIENCE AND ART OF PREPARING HUMAN FOOD._


  BY

  PIERRE BLOT,

  PROFESSOR OF GASTRONOMY, AND FOUNDER OF THE NEW YORK COOKING ACADEMY.


  "If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land."


  NEW YORK:
  D. APPLETON AND COMPANY,
  1, 3, and 5 BOND STREET.
  1884.




  Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1867, by

  D. APPLETON & CO.,

  In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the United States for the
  Southern District of New York.




  PREFACE.

Food is the most important of our wants; we cannot exist without it. The
man who does not use his brain to select and prepare his food, is not
above the brutes that take it in its raw state. It is to the physique
what education is to the mind, coarse or refined. Good and well-prepared
food beautifies the physique the same as a good and well-directed
education beautifies the mind. A cook-book is like a book on chemistry,
it cannot be used to any advantage if theory is not blended with
practice. It must also be written according to the natural products and
climate of the country in which it is to be used, and with a perfect
knowledge of the properties of the different articles of food and
condiments.

Like many other books, it is not the size that makes it practical; we
could have made this one twice as large as it is, without having added a
single receipt to it, by only having given separate ones for pieces of
meat, birds, fishes, etc., that are of the same kind and prepared
alike. All cook-books written by mere compilers, besides giving the same
receipt several times, recommend the most absurd mixtures as being the
best and of the "latest French style."

Although cookery has made more progress within two or three years, in
this country as well as in Europe, than it had since 1830, and although
all our receipts are complete, practical, wholesome, and in accordance
with progress, still they are simple. Our aim has been to enable every
housekeeper and professional cook, no matter how inexperienced they may
be, to prepare any kind of food in the best and most wholesome way, with
economy, celerity, and taste; and also to serve a dinner in as orderly a
manner as any steward can do.

We did not intend to make a book, such as that of CAREME, which cannot
be used at all except by cooks of very wealthy families, and with which
one cannot make a dinner costing less than twenty dollars a head. Such a
book is to housekeepers or plain cooks what a Latin dictionary is to a
person of merely elementary education.

If we give so many different ways of preparing the same article of food,
it is not with a view to complicate cookery, but people's taste is in
food as in dress, differing not only in the selection of colors, but
also in shape; therefore, by our variety of dishes and our different
styles of decorating them; by the ease that they can be prepared in the
cheapest as well as in the most costly way, we think we have met all
wants and all tastes. The wealthy, as well as those in limited
circumstances, can use our receipts with the same advantage.

Our division of cookery and the system of arranging _bills of fare_,
contained in these pages, solve that great and perplexing question,
especially for ladies, how to arrange a bill of fare for every season,
to suit any number of guests, at a greater or less expense, as they may
desire. Every one knows that money alone cannot make good dishes;
however good the raw materials may be, they require proper preparations
before being palatable and wholesome.


  TO HOUSEKEEPERS AND COOKS.

A cook-book cannot be used like a dictionary; a receipt is like a rule
of grammar: to comprehend it thoroughly, it is indispensable to
understand others. The author, therefore, earnestly recommends to his
readers to begin by perusing carefully the directions, etc., at the
beginning of the book, and also the explanations given on and heading
the different articles of food, before attempting the preparation of a
dish for the first time. They will thus soon be able to prepare any dish
by merely reading the receipt. If all the explanations necessary were
given at every receipt, this work would have filled more than ten
volumes like the present.

We are aware that the study of cookery is as uninviting and dry as the
study of grammar at first; so is the study of every science and even
art; but it becomes comparatively easy and interesting after a while.
Mere flourish in a receipt would have the same effect as in a rule of
grammar.


  TO COOKS.

We think the following friendly recommendations will not be out of place
here. They are in the interest of both the housekeeper and the cook:

    Make use of every thing good.

    Waste nothing, however little it may be.

    Have no prejudices.

    Be careful, clean, and punctual.

    Always bear in mind that routine is the greatest enemy of
    progress, and that you have agreed to faithfully perform your
    daily duties for a certain consideration.

        PIERRE BLOT.

    New York, _August_, 1867.




  CONTENTS.

                                     PAGE
  COOKING,                              9
  DIRECTIONS, EXPLANATIONS, ETC.,      16
  DIVERS RECEIPTS,                     44
  POTAGES OR SOUPS,                    61
  SAUCES,                              97
  FARCES AND GARNITURES,              113
  FISH,                               125
  BEEF,                               162
  MUTTON,                             184
  VEAL,                               202
  PORK,                               226
  POULTRY,                            237
  GAME,                               276
  VEGETABLES,                         305
  EGGS, MACARONI, AND RICE,           356
  SWEET DISHES,                       376
  PASTRY,                             409
  BILLS OF FARE,                      459
  INDEX,                              465




  COOKING.


The science and art of cooking may be divided into ten principal parts;
the rest is all fancy. These ten parts are: Baking, Boiling, Broiling,
Frying, Mixing, Roasting, Sauteing, Seasoning, Simmering, and Stewing.

Tasting is an adjunct to all.

_Baking._--In baking, see that the furnace or oven be properly heated;
some dishes require more heat than others. Look at the object in process
of baking from time to time, and especially at the beginning, turn it
round if necessary, in case it be heated more on one side than on the
other, to prevent burning.

In baking meat and fish, besides keeping the bottom of the pan covered
with broth or water, place a piece of buttered paper over the object in
the pan; it not only prevents it from burning, but acts as a
self-basting operation, and keeps the top moist and juicy.

If the top of cakes bake faster than the rest, place a piece of paper on
it.

In most of our receipts, we give the degree of heat necessary to bake
the different objects; it will, no doubt, be found valuable information.

_Boiling._--This is the most abused branch in cooking; we know that many
good-meaning housewives and professional cooks boil things that ought
to be prepared otherwise, with a view to economy; but a great many do it
through laziness. Boiling requires as much care as any other branch, but
they do not think so, and therefore indulge in it.

Another abuse is to boil fast instead of slowly. Set a small ocean of
water on a brisk fire and boil something in it as fast as you can, you
make much steam but do not cook faster; the degree of heat being the
same as if you were boiling slowly.

If the object you boil, and especially boil fast, contains any flavor,
you evaporate it, and cannot bring it back.

Many things are spoiled or partly destroyed by boiling, such as meat,
coffee, etc.

Water that has been boiled is inferior for cooking purposes, its gases
and alkali being evaporated.

_Broiling._--Whatever you broil, grease the bars of the gridiron first.

Broiling and roasting is the same thing; the object in process of
cooking by either must be exposed to the heat on one side, and the other
side to the air.

Bear in mind that no one can broil or roast in an oven, whatever be its
construction, its process of heating, or its kind of heat. An object
cooked in an oven is baked.

It is better to broil before than over the fire. In broiling before the
fire, all the juice can be saved.

In broiling by gas, there is a great advantage. The meat is placed under
the heat, and as the heat draws the juice of the meat, the consequence
is, that the juice being attracted upward, it is retained in the meat.

A gas broiler is a square, flat drum, perforated on one side and placed
over a frame.

Broiling on live coals or on cinders without a gridiron is certainly not
better than with one, as believed by many; on the contrary, besides not
being very clean, it burns or chars part of the meat.

That belief comes from the fact that when they partook of meat prepared
that way, it was with a sauce that generally accompanies hunters,
fishermen, etc.,--_hunger_--the most savory of all savory sauces.

_Frying._--That part of cooking is not as difficult as it is generally
believed, and properly fried objects are good and do not taste greasy.

To fry requires care, and nothing fried will taste greasy if it has been
dropped in fat properly heated and in enough of it to immerse the
object.

When an object tastes greasy, it is not because it has been fried in
grease, but because there was not enough of it, or because it was not
properly heated; for, if heated enough it closes the pores of the object
and carbonizes the exterior, so that it cannot absorb any.

_Directions for Frying._--Prepare what you intend to fry according to
the directions given in the different receipts.

Have fat, lard, or oil in a pan, enough to immerse the object or objects
intended to be fried.

When the fat is hot enough (see below), place the object in a kind of
wire basket made for that purpose, which drop in the fat and take off
when the object is fried. It is handy, and there is no danger of
breaking the object in taking it off.

There are objects that require to be stirred or turned over while
frying.

Every time you fry any thing, take the fat from the fire, let it stand
in a cool place for about five minutes, then turn it gently into a
stone jar or pot through a strainer; let cool and put away. In turning
the fat, lard, or oil into the jar, pour so that the dregs will be kept
in the pan.

To ascertain with accuracy when the fat, lard, or oil is hot enough to
lay the things in the pan, dip a fork in cold water, the prongs only; so
as to retain but one or two drops of water, which drops you let fall in
the fat, and if it crackles, it is hot enough.

Another way is, when jets of smoke come out of the fat.

There are objects that require more heat than others, some that are more
sightly when brown, and others when of a pale-yellow hue.

If the object is desired brown, leave the pan on a brisk fire while it
is frying; if otherwise, remove it to a slow or less brisk fire.

Fat is not like water, which, no matter how fast you boil it, you cannot
augment the degree of heat, while you can that of fat. If water, by
boiling it fast, could be heated as much as fat, it would be used to fry
in its stead, being cheaper.

_Mixing._--In mixing, pay due attention to the quantities we give in the
receipts; but as everybody has not the same taste, it is very easy to
augment or diminish the quantity of salt, pepper, sugar, butter, etc.,
so as to suit one's own taste.

When the quantity is left to the judgment or taste of the cook, that is,
when the expression _about so much_ is made use of, it is not necessary
then to have the exact quantity; a little more or a little less cannot
spoil or partly destroy the dish.

_Roasting._--When an object is placed on the spit according to
directions, remember that it cannot be basted too often.

The time necessary for roasting a piece of meat or any thing else,
depends as much upon the fire as upon the nature of the meat. Meat
especially requires to be placed very near the fire at first, and then
put back by degrees.

There is nearly as much difference between roasted and baked meat as
there is between broiled and fried meat.

It is generally admitted here, that English roast-beef is so superior to
American roast-beef that it cannot be compared to it. It is not in the
quality of the meat that the difference lies, but in the process of
cooking.

Meat cannot be roasted in an oven, be it in an ordinary or in a patented
one.

That peculiar flavor in roasted meat is produced by the air coming
constantly in contact with the heated meat while revolving on the spit.

Cold roasted meat, when desired to be served warm, is enveloped in
buttered paper and placed on the spit just long enough to warm it.

_Sauteing._--There is no word, that we know, in the English language,
corresponding to the French word _saute_. It differs from frying in
this: that to fry any object requires fat enough to immerse that object;
while to _saute_ it, requires just enough to prevent it from scorching.

Vegetables, omelets, etc., are _sauted_, and not fried.

Meat or fish cooked in a frying-pan with a little butter or fat, is
_sauted_, and not fried; but the term fried is most generally used, the
other being only known to practitioners.

To _saute_ requires a brisk fire; the quicker an object is cooked by
_sauteing_ the better.

_Seasoning._--This is the most difficult part in the science of cooking.
To season is not difficult, but to season properly is quite another
thing.

It is not only necessary to know well how to stew or roast a peace of
meat or any thing else, but to know how to season it, to be able to
judge what quantity and what kind of spices can be used to season such
or such a dish, to what extent all the spices used agree together, and
what taste and flavor they will give to the object with which they are
cooked; for, if not properly used, they may just as likely destroy the
taste and flavor of the object as improve it.

Some dishes require high and much seasoning, others just the contrary.
With a good fire and a good spit, it is not necessary to be a thorough
cook to roast a piece well, but the cook is indispensable to mix the
gravy or sauce with the proper seasonings.

_Simmering._--Simmering differs from boiling only in the amount of heat
allowed under the boiler, kettle, or pan. To simmer, is to boil as
gently and slowly as possible.

_Stewing._--To stew properly it is necessary to have a moderate fire and
as even as possible. A brisk fire would cause much steam to evaporate,
which steam is the flavor of the object stewed.

_Tasting._--This is the most difficult, and at the same time the most
delicate, part of seasoning; it is by tasting that we ascertain if we
have seasoned properly.

In this only two of the senses are engaged, and one of those much more
than the other.

A person may have good feeling, hearing, and sight, and for all that
would not be fit for preparing the simplest dish; the senses of smelling
and tasting are the ones most required, and without which no one can
cook properly.

For these reasons we will take the liberty to recommend to housekeepers,
when they have new cooks, to instruct them on their taste, and always
let them know when they have seasoned too much or too little. To the
cooks we will say, do not season according to your own taste, if the
persons for whom you cook do not like it.

If the housekeeper would give his or her candid and frank opinion of the
dishes to the cook, and if the latter be not stubborn, the best results
might be obtained and both would be benefited by it. That ought to be
done every day while making the bill of fare.

To taste a sauce, as well as to know if a thing is good to eat, we
cannot trust either our eyes, fingers, or ears; we then have recourse,
first to our smelling, and then to our tasting: so do most animals.

We always commence by smelling, and when that sense is satisfied as far
as it is concerned, we then apply our tasting qualities; and if that
last one is, in its turn, satisfied also, we proceed, that is, we
masticate, if mastication is necessary, and then swallow.




  DIRECTIONS, EXPLANATIONS, ETC.


  ANISE.

Anise comes from Egypt, and is used as a spice.


  APRICOT.

This is a native of Armenia. It is served like plums and peaches; in
salad, compote, etc.


  BACON.

Never use smoked bacon or ham, except when especially directed. The
smoky taste would spoil the dish.


  BAIN-MARIE.

A bain-marie is a large vessel of hot or boiling water, in which
saucepans, kettles, moulds, etc., are placed to prepare or warm food. It
is also used to keep any kind of food warm, when something is ready to
serve, and the time has not come; the utensil containing it is placed in
hot water, and it not only keeps it warm, but there is almost no
evaporation while in it. It does not boil away either.

There are things that are much more delicate when prepared or warmed in
hot water.

One utensil made for that purpose, and of brass, with compartments, is
more handy, but a large saucepan may be used in its stead.

When any thing is in the bain-marie, the water should not be allowed to
boil fast enough either to upset the pans or get into them.


  BAKE-PANS.

A bake-pan for baking meat, fish, or any other object that requires
liquor of any kind, must have borders in order to hold that liquor; but
a bake-pan for cakes or any other object that does not require any
liquor, or that does not turn liquid in baking, is better without
borders--that is, a simple piece of sheet iron of a size to go easily in
the oven.


  BAY-LEAF.

This is known also under its French name laurier.

It is used as a spice; it is exceedingly cheap and is excellent to
flavor sauces, gravies, etc.

It comes especially from Italy, where it is used to pack figs, oil, and
different fruits.


  BEETS.

The red beet is much used to decorate different dishes.

It is boiled, then pickled, cut in fancy shapes, either with a knife or
with paste-cutters, and tastefully placed on or around the object it is
used to decorate.

It is served as a _hors-d'oeuvre_, pickled, and cut in slices.

_To boil._--Set it on a good fire in a pan, covered with cold water, and
boil gently till done.

The beet must not be touched at all with any thing rough, for if the
skin or root is cut or broken, all the color goes away in boiling, it is
not fit to decorate, and loses much of its quality.

When you buy beets, see that they are not bruised, and that the root is
not broken.


  BRAISING.

Braising, in cookery, means to cook any thing with fire under and upon
the pan, kettle, or other utensil.

A good oven is by far more easy, and answers perfectly the purpose. An
oven not only warms the under and upper parts of the utensil, but all
around it also.


  BUNCH OF SEASONINGS.

It is composed of parsley, thyme, bay-leaf, and cloves, and sometimes a
clove of garlic is added. Place the sprigs of parsley in the left hand,
rather spread, lay the others on and in the middle of the parsley, and
envelop them in it as well as possible, then tie the whole with twine.

As all these seasonings are never served except when chopped, they are
more easily taken out than if they were not tied together.


  BUTTERED PAPER.

Dip in lukewarm butter a piece of white paper of the size you want, and
envelop the piece to broil or roast with it. Tie the paper around with
twine or coarse thread.


  OILED PAPER.

The only difference between oiled and buttered paper is, that it is
dipped in sweet or olive oil instead of butter.


  CATSUP.

Beware of what is sold under the name of catsups and pickles; many cases
of dyspepsia, debility, and consumption come from using such stuff.


  CAVIARE.

It is made with the roes, hard and soft, of the sterlet. It is imported
from Russia, and is served as a _hors-d'oeuvre_, with slices of lemon
and toast.


  CERVELAS, SAUCISSONS, ETC.

Cervelas, saucissons, as well as smoked sausages, are pork-butchers'
preparations, cut slantwise in very thin slices, and served as
_hors-d'oeuvre_, with parsley in the middle of the dish.


  CHEESE.

Cheese is the first plate of _dessert_ to be partaken of. "A dinner
without cheese is like a handsome lady with but one
eye."--_Brillat-Savarin_.

"Cheese takes away all the taste that might be left from preceding
dishes, and by that means prepares the palate for the appreciation of
the good things, the delicate flavors of the dessert and wines."


  COCHINEAL.

Cochineal, or carmine. Buy the cochineal in powder, prepared for cooking
purposes, mix some (say the size of half a split pea) with a few drops
of cold water and mix that again with what you wish to color. The
quantity of cochineal is according to the quantity of mixture and also
according to how deep the color is desired.


  CHERVIL.

This comes from Italy, and is used in salad and as a spice.


  COLANDER.

Besides the ordinary colander, it is necessary to have a fine one. We
mean, by a fine colander, one with holes half the size of the ordinary
ones, that is, just between the colander and strainer. A colander
should not have holes on the sides; it is handier and more clean with
holes at the bottom only.


  CURRY.

We think that curry is very good and necessary on the borders of the
Ganges River, and for that very reason we think also that it ought to be
eschewed on the borders of the Hudson, Delaware, Ohio, and thereabouts.

We cannot describe curry better than by giving here the answer
(_verbatim et literatim_) of a gentleman who has lived a few years in
Java, to a question on the properties and qualities of curry. He said
that he thought it good and even necessary to use some there on account
of the climate, but every time he had eaten it he thought he was
swallowing boiling alcohol or live coals.


  DINING-ROOM.

It must be well ventilated and lighted. The best degree of temperature
is about 66 degrees Fahr.


  DISH.

A dish ought to be charming to the eye, flattering to the smell, and
delicious to the taste.


  DRAINING.

To drain, is to put in a colander any thing that has been soaked,
washed, or boiled, etc., in water or any other liquid, in order to dry
it, or at least to let drop from it the water or other liquid that may
be in it.

Salads of greens, as a general thing, are drained after being washed,
before putting them in the salad-dish; they must be drained as dry as
possible, but without pressing on them, as it would wilt the leaves, and
give the salad an unsightly appearance.


  DUSTING.

A pan, after being buttered or greased, is dusted with flour, sugar, or
even bread-crumbs, to prevent the mixture that is put in it from
sticking. Sugar, etc., may also be sprinkled over dishes with a dredger.


  DRINKING.

When weary, or cold, or warm, or exhausted, we drink in preference to
eating, because we feel the effect instantaneously; while after eating
even the most substantial food, we do not feel the effect for some time.

When exhausted and when immediate relief is necessary, the best drinks
are broth, chocolate, milk, or water sweetened with sugar. It is more
than a mistake to drink wines or liquors at such a time; it is really
committing slow suicide.

When only thirsty, without exhaustion, we ought to drink cold water with
a teaspoon. When thirsty and heated, the first thing to do is to dip the
hands in cold water deep enough just to cover the wrists; then dip a
towel in the water, lay it on the forehead, and then drink cold water
with a teaspoon.

A few drops of vinegar or lemon-juice may be added to the water. If
exceedingly hot, keep your hands in cold water and the towel on your
forehead at least one minute before drinking.


  HOT WEATHER.

A remark or two on eating and drinking in hot weather are always in
season. Green vegetables, properly cooked, are certainly healthful in
warm weather; but it is a mistake to think that meat should be excluded
from summer diet. The hotter the weather, the more the system wastes,
and therefore the more we must supply.

In order to keep the body in a healthful condition, meat ought to be
eaten at least once a day in summer-time. It would be well to vary this
programme by taking one meal of fish on every other day.

Fat should be disused as much as possible. A very little good butter
with your fresh radishes at breakfast is as much fat as is necessary.


  COLD WEATHER.

Fat meat is good in winter and is relished; so are dry vegetables and
saccharine substances.


  FOOD.

Nature has provided man with a mind, in order that he should study what
kind of food suits his constitution; he who does not do it, is not above
the lower animals.

"Good things have been made by the Creator for good people, flowers have
certainly not been made for brutes, either quadruped or
biped."--_Jefferson._

"It is from good things that, in a human point of view, we derive the
strength necessary to our limbs, let us partake of the same and be
thankful."--_Rev._----_Chadband._

Have your food selected and prepared according to constitution,
occupation, climate, age, and sex.

Waste in females is greater than in males.

Animals, generally, are very careful in selecting their food.

A temporary bloatedness may be obtained, especially with the young, by
eating much farinaceous food, such as pancakes, etc., but it does not
last, and is sure to bring on disease or sickness, or both.

Man is omnivorous, and must be fed accordingly.

Extreme leanness comes from want of proper food, either in youth or old
age.

It is not the amount that is eaten which nourishes, but the amount that
is digested; an excess of food is as bad as a lack of it.

Good and well-baked bread is nutritious and healthful, while unbaked
bread is heavy and difficult of digestion.

Take at least half an hour's rest after a hearty meal, for mind and
stomach cannot work at the same time.

Never eat when angry, or tired, or when heated; but be as cool and as
gay as possible, for food being exposed to a heat of about 100 degrees
Fahr, in the stomach, would ferment instead of digesting.

Take a hearty but by no means heavy dinner.

Eat slowly, at regular hours, and masticate well, but do not bolt your
food, or eat any thing that does not taste good.

Drink slowly, moderately, and always taste before swallowing.

Vary your food as much as possible.

Always have at least one dish of vegetables for dinner, besides meat,
and also ripe fruit.

See that every thing you eat or drink is of a good quality, wholesome
and properly prepared.


  ECONOMY.

There is not a word so much misused in cooking as the word economy.

Prejudice comes for a large share in the use of it.

How many things are thrown away, or wasted by mere prejudice or
ignorance!

It is often from economy that a woman washes meat, because some part of
it does not look clean. Instead of washing it, do not buy it; or, if
bought, cut off a thin slice and throw it away: it is more economical
than washing the whole piece, which you partly destroy by the process.

It is with a view to economy, that an old, bad custom prevails of
boiling coffee. What an economy of sending the best part of the coffee
(the aroma) to the attic, and the rest to the dining-room. A bad drink
can be made cheaper with many things than with coffee.

Tea is also boiled with an eye to economy.


  EGG-BEATER.

We have tried five different kinds in Boston, before a large audience
and on the demand of an inventor of one, but none could beat eggs as
well as a common hand-beater. The whites of the eggs could not be raised
with any of the others much more than half as much as with the common
one; and besides, could not be beaten stiff.

Many persons do not succeed in making cakes of different preparations in
which whites of eggs beaten to a stiff froth are used, because the eggs
are not properly beaten.

Any tinsmith can make an egg-beater. It is generally made with tin-wire,
but may be made with brass-wire.

With the cut below, as a model, it can be easily made.

[Illustration]

The handle _a_ is of tin, into which the tin wires _b_ are fastened and
soldered.


  ERRORS IN COOKING.

Ignorance produces abuse or error, or both. Blissful ignorance may be a
fine thing in some cases, but either in preparing or partaking of food,
it is certainly more than an abuse, it is a dangerous error.

It is by ignorance or disease that man abuses wine or any other liquor.

It is by ignorance or prejudice that many eschew the best and most
healthful of condiments, such as garlics, onions, etc. They dislike them
on account of their pungent taste when raw, not knowing that when cooked
it is all evaporated. Their pungent taste comes from the volatile oil
they contain, and which evaporates in cooking; it cannot be retained,
but their sugar is retained, and gives such a good flavor to gravies and
sauces.


  FENNEL.

This is said to be a native of the Canary Islands; it has a very strong
taste, and is used as a spice, especially in blood pudding. The Romans
used a great deal of it.


  FIG.

The fig-tree comes from Mesopotamia. Figs are generally served as
_hors-d'oeuvre_, or used in puddings, etc.


  FINES HERBES.

Parsley and cives chopped fine, and used for omelets, or with cold meat,
sauces, etc., are called thus.


  FLOUR.

In cooking, new flour is not as good as old; it does not thicken as well
and as fast.


  FOIES GRAS.

_Foies_, or _pates de foies gras_ are made with geese-livers, fresh fat
pork, truffles, ham, _fines herbes_, and spices.

They are always served cold as a _releve_ or _entree_, but most
generally they are used for lunch or supper.


  FRUIT-CORER.

There are many sizes in the set, to core from a pineapple to a cherry.

[Illustration]


  GALANTINE.

The word galantine means a _boned bird_, or a boned shoulder of veal.


  GLAZING.

Glazing is generally done by means of a brush or with feathers. A beaten
egg, or syrup, or jelly, or egg and sugar, etc., are used to glaze
cakes, etc. It is done by dipping the brush into the egg or jelly, and
by spreading it on the cake or other object before baking or before
serving, as directed in the different receipts. It is also done by
sifting powdered sugar on cakes which are put back in the oven for a
short time--that is, the time necessary to melt the sugar.


  INDIGESTION.

A cup of tea and camomile, half of each, with a few drops of
orange-flower water, and the whole well sweetened and taken warm, is
very good after having eaten something difficult to digest.


  ITALIAN PASTES.

Macaroni, vermicelli, and the like dry pastes, are called Italian
pastes, whatever the shape--round, oval, or star-like.


  ISINGLASS.

It is sometimes used instead of gelatine to make jellies.


  JELLY-BAG.

Make a conical bag of good white flannel, about twenty inches long,
fifteen inches broad at one end when spread on a flat surface, or about
thirty inches in circumference, the other end being the point. Sew to it
four pieces of white tape at the large end, and at equal distances, so
that two sticks may be run into them. The sticks are placed on chairs or
something else, in order to have the point of the bag about one foot
from the floor. It is then ready to pass the jellies through it.

[Illustration]


  KITCHEN UTENSILS.

Gastronomists use, in preference to any thing else, crockery or earthen
pans; or, for want of these, block-tin pans.

Copper is, in the end, the cheapest of all; but American cooks do not
like them because they require too much care and must be examined every
day; to prevent any accident, it is necessary to keep the inside
properly lined.

Many indispositions are caused by food prepared in copper not properly
lined; even food allowed to cool in a well-lined pan would be dangerous.

Pans lined with porcelain are excellent, but the trouble with them is,
that they crack, and after that cannot be cleaned; something will
always remain between the lining and the iron, and spoil every thing
cooked in them.

The tin-lined are preferable, on account of being easily cleaned by
means of a small birch-broom, washing-soda, and boiling water.


  LAIT DE POULE.

Mix well in a tumbler a yolk of egg and a teaspoonful of sugar; then add
a few drops of orange-flower water (_eau de fleur d'oranger_); pour
boiling water on the whole, little by little, stirring the while, and
drink warm.

The quantity of water is according to taste.

A gill of water to a yolk of egg makes it thick enough.

It makes an excellent drink, to be taken just before retiring, for
persons with cough.


  LARD.

Never buy lard ready made if you can help it, but take hog's fat, the
part enveloping the kidneys, or leaf lard, and chop it fine, put it in a
cast-iron or crockery kettle with a bay-leaf and a stalk of thyme to
every two pounds of fat; set on a moderate fire, and as soon as it
begins to melt, take the melted part out with a ladle, and put it in a
stone jar or pot; be careful not to take any pieces of fat not yet
melted. Continue that process till it is all melted.

The dry or hard part that remains at the bottom of the kettle when done
is no good.

Lard made thus is as white as snow, and may be kept a long time.

When there is water in lard, it flies all over the fire; in that case,
boil it a few minutes with a cover on the pan, and then use.


  FAT FOR FRYING.

Take beef suet, the part around the kidneys, or any kind of fat, raw or
cooked; remove as much as possible fibres, nerves, thin skin, or bones;
chop it fine, put it in a cast-iron or crockery kettle; add to it the
fat you may have skimmed from the top of broth, sauces or, gravies. Set
the pan on a moderate fire; boil gently for about fifteen minutes, skim
it well during the process; take from the fire, let it stand about five
minutes, and then strain.

Put it in a stone jar or pot, and keep it in a dry and cool place. Cover
the jar when perfectly cold.

It is as good as lard and more handy; it does not fly over the pan like
lard.

A careful cook seldom buys fat; generally there is enough coming from
skimming of broth, sauces, and gravies, for every purpose.


  TO CLARIFY FAT.

Set the fat on a moderate fire in a pan, and as soon as it commences to
boil, place a slice of bread dried in the oven in it, boil gently for
about half an hour; take from the fire, let it settle for a few minutes;
remove the bread, turn gently into a jar or pot, leaving the dregs in
the pan.

_Chicken_, _Turkey_, _and Goose Fat._--The fat of the above birds is
never used to fry, but to _saute_ instead of butter. To make omelets it
is excellent; an omelet is whiter and more sightly made with chicken-fat
than when made with butter. It is clarified as directed above.


  GAME-FAT.

Game-fat can be used instead of other fat and also instead of butter, to
_saute_, or what is generally called partly fry, game; it may also be
used, instead of butter to bake game.

It must be clarified longer than other fat, but in the same way.

The boiling of fat with water, as indicated in some cook-books, is only
a fancy and extra work, it has no effect whatever on the fat. It is the
same by keeping it for hours in a _bain-marie_; it does not change it in
the least.


  BATTER FOR FRYING.

_For frying Vegetables._--Put three tablespoonfuls of flour in a bowl
with two yolks of eggs, and cold water enough to make a kind of thin
paste, then add salt and half a teaspoonful of sweet oil; mix well. Beat
the two whites of the eggs to a stiff froth and mix them with the rest.
Put the batter away in a cold place for at least two hours, and use.

It must not be put away longer than for half a day.

_Another._--Proceed as above in every particular, except that you use
milk instead of water.

_For frying Fish._--Make it exactly as the above, except that you do not
use any oil.

_For frying Fritters._--Mix well together in a bowl three tablespoonfuls
of flour with two yolks of eggs and cold water enough to make a thin
paste; add a pinch of sugar, rum or brandy, or any other liquor,
according to taste, from one to three or four tablespoonfuls, mix well
again, and put away for at least two or three hours, but not longer than
twelve hours.

_Eggs and Crumbs for frying._--The eggs are beaten as for omelets, with
a little salt. The objects to be fried are dipped in the eggs first,
then rolled in bread-crumbs and fried.

_Another._--When rolled in bread-crumbs as above; dip again in the eggs,
roll again in bread-crumbs and fry.

_Another._--Dip the object in melted butter, then in eggs, and roll in
bread-crumbs; fry.


  LARDING.

All pork-butchers sell salt pork for larding. Cut it in slices and then
by cutting the slices across it makes square strips or fillets.

The strips must be of a proper size to be easily inserted into the
larding-needle, and are about two inches and a half long.

When the needle is run half way through the meat, insert the salt pork
into it, pull the needle off and leave the salt pork inside of the meat,
both ends of it sticking out.

If it were running through, that is, if the salt pork were pulled off
with the needle, most likely the strips are too small; then pull slowly,
and when the salt pork is far enough into the meat, press on it with the
finger and pull the needle, it will then stay in its proper place. It is
better to cut a few strips first and try if they are of a proper size.

If, in pulling off the needle, the salt pork does not enter the meat,
the strips are too large.

If the strips are of a proper size and break while pulling the needle
off, then the pork is not good.

_Fricandeau_, sweetbreads, birds, etc., are larded in the same way.

For beef _a la mode_, it is described in the receipt.


  LARDING-NEEDLE.

The best are made of brass. Those that are sold for steel are generally
of iron, and break easily.

Those for beef _a la mode_ are of steel, and must be flat near the
point, in order to cut the meat.


  LEAVEN.

Knead four ounces of flour with baker's yeast, enough to make a rather
thick dough; give it the shape of a rather flat apple; with a sharp
knife make two cuts on the top and across, and through about one-third
of the paste; put the paste in a pan of lukewarm water. In a few minutes
it will float; take it off and use then after it has floated about two
minutes.


  MEAT.

The time it takes to cook meat depends as much on the quality of the
meat as on the fire. Some persons like meat more done than others; in
many cases you must consult your own taste or that of your guests.

Beef, lamb, mutton, and game, may be eaten rather underdone, according
to taste; domestic fowls must be properly cooked; but pork and veal must
always be overdone, or else it is very unwholesome, if not dangerous.

The following table may be used as a guide:

  Bear and Buffalo,                      a five-pound piece,    5 to 7 hrs.
  Wild Boar and Woodchuck,                     Do.    do.       3 to 4 hrs.
  Beef,                                        Do.    do.       1 hr. 30 m.
   Do.                                   a ten pound piece,     2 hrs. 30 m.
  Capon,                                 a large one,           1 hour.
  Chicken,                               a middling-sized one, 45 min.
  Duck,                                  a large one,          45 min.
   Do.                                   a small one,          30 min.
  Goose,                                 a large one,           2 hours.
   Do.                                   a small one,           1 hr. 30 m.
  Grouse, Heathcock, Snipe, and W'dcock, a fat one,            30 min.
   Do.         do.    do.         do.    a lean one,           20 min.
  Guinea Fowl,                           a middling-sized one,  1 hour.
  Hare,                                  an old one,            1 hr. 30 m.
   Do.                                   a young one,           about 1 hr.
  Lamb and Kid,                          a large quarter,       1 hour.
   Do.    do.                            a small one,          45 min.
  Mutton,                                a four-pound piece,    1 hour.
   Do.                                   a six    "     "       1 hr. 30 m.
  Partridge, Pheasant, and Prairie-Hen,  a middling-sized one, 30 to 45 m.
  Pigeon,                                one,                  30 min.
  Pork,                                  a two-pound piece,     1 hr. 15 m.
   Do.                                   a four    "    "       2 hours.
  Quail,                                 one,                  20 min.
  Sucking-Pig,                           a large one,           2 hrs. 30 m.
   Do.    do.                            a small one,           2 hours.
  Rabbit,                                a middling-sized one, 30 to 45 min.
  Robin, Blackbird, Fig-pecker,
  High-holder, Lapwing, Meadow Lark,
  Plover, Reed-bird, Thrush,
  Yellow-bird, and other small birds,                          15 to 20 min.
  Turkey,                                a large one,           1 hr. 30 m.
   Do.                                   a small one,           about 1 hour.
  Veal,                                  a two-pound piece,     1 hr. 15 m.
  Venison,                               a four    "    "       about 1 hour.

The following table may be used as a guide to know how long meat may be
kept, in a cool, dry, and dark place; and protected from flies or other
insects:

                                                In Summer.    In Winter.

  Bear and Buffalo,                             3 to 4 days.    10 to 15 days.
  Wild Boar and Woodchuck,                      3 to 4    "      8 to 10    "
  Beef and Pork,                                2 to 4    "      6 to 10    "
  Capon,                                        2 to 3    "      4 to  8    "
  Chicken, old one,                             3 to 4    "      4 to 10    "
  Do.    young one,                             1 to 2    "      2 to  6    "
  Deer, Partridge, Pheasant, Prairie-Hen, Quail,
  Guinea-Fowl, and Turkey,                      2 to 3    "      6 to 10    "
  Duck and Goose,                               3 to 4    "      4 to  8    "
  Hare and Rabbit,                              2 to 3    "      4 to  8    "
  Grouse, Heathcock, Snipe, and Woodcock,       3 to 4    "      8 to 15    "
  Lamb, Kid, Sucking Pig, and Veal,             2 to 3    "      3 to  6    "
  Mutton,                                       2 to 3    "      6 to 10    "
  Pigeons, Blackbirds, Fig-peckers, High-holders,
  Lapwings, Meadow Larks,
  Plovers, Reed-birds, Robins, Thrushes,
  Yellow-birds, and other small birds,          2 to 3    "      6 to 10    "

The time must be reduced one-half in summer, in stormy or damp weather,
and one-third in winter, in thawing or rainy weather.

_Fish._--When cleaned and prepared as directed, place it in a crockery
stewpan, cover it with cold water, add a little salt, two or three
sprigs of thyme, and one or two bay-leaves. It will keep thus for some
time.


  MOULDS.

_Mould for Meat Pies._--A mould for meat pies may be round or oval; it
must be in two pieces, fastened together by a kind of hinge. When the
pie is baked, the wire pin holding the mould is pulled, and the mould
removed.

[Illustration]

_Mould for Pies_, _Jellies_, _etc._--This mould may be used for any
thing that requires a mould; it may also be round, oval, or of any other
shape.

[Illustration]


  OLIVES.

Fresh and ripe they are served as dessert with other fruit. Preserved,
they are served as a _hors-d'oeuvre_, and used to flavor and decorate
different dishes.

Olives as well as sardines are healthful and considered one of the best
_hors-d'oeuvre_.


  OSMAZOME.

Osmazome is found in beef, mutton, full-grown domestic fowls, venison,
and game; in the latter, when the bird or animal is adult.

In meat soup, the osmazome is the soluble part of the meat that
dissolves in boiling, and makes nutritious broth.

In broiled or roasted pieces, it is that part which makes a kind of
brown crust on the surface of the meat, and also the brownish part of
the gravy.

Chicken, lamb, sucking-pig, veal, etc., do not contain any osmazome.


  PARSLEY, CHERVIL, THYME, CELERY, SAGE, ETC.,--FOR WINTER USE.

Hang in the shade, under a shed, or in a garret, and in a clean and dry
place, some small bunches of parsley, chervil, celery, etc., the roots
upward; leave them thus till perfectly dry, then place them in your
spice-box for winter use.

The best time for drying them is at the end of October or the beginning
of November; dig them up in fine and dry weather, so as to have them
clean without washing.

Soak in cold water half an hour before using.


  WHITE PEPPER.

This is black pepper decorticated.

Put peppercorns in a bowl, cover with cold water, and leave thus till
the skin is tender; then drain. Take the skin off, let it dry, grind it;
place with your other spices, and use where directed. It takes many days
for the skin to become tender.


  QUALITY OF MEAT, FISH, VEGETABLES, FRUIT, ETC.

The quality of meat depends entirely on the quality of food with which
the animal has been fed.

For fish, the taste or quality is according to the kind of water in
which they have lived; fish from a muddy pond smell of mud, while fish
from a clear brook are delicious.

The same difference exists in vegetables and fruit; their quality is
according to the quality or nature of the ground in which they have been
grown.


  PASTRY-BAG.

A bag for pastry is made with thick, strong linen; of a conical shape,
about one foot long, eight inches broad at one end when spread on a flat
surface, and which makes about sixteen inches in circumference, and only
one inch and a quarter at the other end, and in which latter end a tin
tube is placed, so that the smaller end of the tin tube will come out of
the smaller end of the bag. Putting then some mixture into the bag and
by pressing from the upper end downward, the mixture will come out of
the tin tube.


  RAW MATERIALS.

If American cookery is inferior to any other generally, it is not on
account of a want of the first two requisites--raw materials and money
to buy them; so there is no excuse for it, both are given to the cooks.

Here, where markets rival the best markets of Europe and even surpass
them in abundance, it is really a pity to live as many do live.


  SCALLOPED KNIFE.

This knife is used to cut beets, carrots, turnip-rooted celery,
potatoes, radishes, and turnips; in slices, round, oblong, or of any
other shape; either to decorate dishes, or to be served alone or with
something else, or to be fried.

[Illustration]

The annexed cuts will give an idea of what can be done with it. It is
understood that the vegetables are peeled first.

[Illustration]


  SHALLOTS.

Shallots come from Syria. Shallot is stronger than garlic and onion; a
real Tartar sauce cannot be made without shallot. The small, green onion
is a good substitute for it.


  SKEWERS.

The cuts below are skewers. The common ones are used to fasten pieces of
meat together; to roast or bake small birds, liver in _brochette_, etc.,
etc.

[Illustration]

Those to decorate are only used with different flowers or vegetables,
and stuck inside of different pieces of meat as a decoration. They are
removed just before carving.

The use of them is explained in the different receipts. They may be
different from those seen in the cuts.


  SPICES.

The cooks of this country generally have a queer idea of what they call
French cookery and French spices.

Some honestly believe that to make a French dish a great deal of pepper
and other strong seasonings must be put in.

Many other persons, who have not been in Europe, really believe also,
that French cookery is what is called highly-seasoned. There never was a
greater mistake.

If French cooks use several kinds of spices, and may-be more than
American cooks, they are not the same; or if some are the same, such as
pepper, they use them in much smaller proportions.

They generally use thyme, parsley, bay-leaf, chervil, tarragon, etc.,
which are aromatic; but never use (in this climate) ginger, curry,
cayenne pepper, pimento, catsups, variegated colored pickles made with
pyroligneous acids, etc., and which are very exciting and irritating.

Some of our readers may naturally ask: How is it that French cookery is
believed by many to be the contrary of what it really is?

Because every eating-house, of no matter what size, pretends to be a
first-rate one or a fashionable one--and to be first-rate or fashionable
must, as a matter of course, have French cooks, or at least cook French
dishes.

You enter the place, ask for a French dish; or, ask if you can have such
a dish, _a la Francaise_?

You are politely and emphatically answered in the affirmative; and very
often the polite waiter says that a French cook presides in the kitchen.

Result!--the cook, be he from the Green Isle or of African descent,
receiving the order to prepare a French dish, puts a handful of pepper
in the already too much peppered, old-fashioned prepared dish, and sends
it to the confident customer as a genuine French dish.

Said customer never asks a second time for a French dish, and pronounces
French cookery to be--abominable!


  STIRRING.

Never use any spoon but a wooden one to stir any thing on the fire or in
a warm state.


  STRAINING.

To strain, is to pass a sauce or any thing else through a sieve, a
strainer, or a piece of cloth, in order to have it freed from particles
of every kind.

Broth is strained to make soup, so as to remove the small pieces of
bones that may be in it, etc.


  SUGAR.

Sugar plays a very important part in cooking. It is added to cereals,
vegetables, and fruit, many of which would almost be unpalatable without
it, and which are rendered not only palatable but wholesome by its
action.

It is the sugar of the carrot and that of the onion, or of the garlic,
that gives such a peculiar and delicious flavor to gravies and sauces,
to _beef a la mode_, _fricandeau_, etc.

_Pulverized._--When pulverized or powdered sugar can be had pure, it
saves the trouble to do it; but often there are foreign matters in it
and therefore it is better to make it; you know then what you have.

Break loaf sugar into small lumps, pound it and sift it. With a fine
sieve, you can make it as fine as you please.

It was not used in Europe until about the middle of the seventeenth
century.

For the cooking of sugar, see Preserves.


  TARRAGON.

The French name of tarragon is _estragon_. It is excellent in vinegar
and in many fish sauces. It is aromatic, sudorific, and stomachic, and
grows very well in this country. It grows at least twice as large here
as in Europe.


  TIN TUBES.

These tubes are put in the pastry-bag, at the smaller end of it, to make
_meringues_, ladies' fingers, etc.; they are of tin, and can be made by
any tinsmith.

They have the shape of a trapezoid or frustum. Two are enough for any
purpose.

No. 1. One inch and a half long; one inch and three-eighths in diameter
at one end, and nine-sixteenths of an inch at the other end.

No. 2. One inch and a half long; one inch and a half in diameter at one
end, and six-eighths of an inch at the other.


  TRUFFLES.

Truffles are found in Europe and Africa, where they were first
discovered.

The truffle is neither an animal nor a vegetable, although it has been
classed among the fungi, which has root, and the truffle has neither
root nor stem.

The truffle is used for stuffing and flavoring only otherwise it is not
of much value. On account of their scarcity, and the difficulty in
finding them, they are rather costly.

We think truffles may be compared to lace--both are dear, and neither
has an intrinsic value.


  VANILLA.

Is a native of America, extensively used for seasoning creams, pastry,
etc., to which it gives a delicious flavor.

Although a native of America, all the extracts of vanilla, as well as
others, were formerly imported; but within a few years Americans have
found out that they are able to distil also, and "Burnett's Extract of
Vanilla" is better known to-day all over the country than any other.


  VEGETABLE SPOONS.

Vegetable spoons are used to cut potatoes, carrots, and turnips; there
are different shapes, round, oval, carrot-shape, plain, and scalloped.
We give here only two, being sufficient to explain their use.

The first (_a_) is of an oval shape, and makes the cut _c_; the second
(_b_) is round, and makes the cut _d_.

[Illustration]

When the vegetable is peeled, place the spoon on it, the convex side up;
holding the vegetable in your left hand, press on the spoon with your
left thumb, and in order to cause it to cut the vegetable while turning
it with the right hand, first half way or rather when the half of it is
inside of the vegetable, stop, turn it the other way, causing it to cut
the vegetable also, then raise it up without turning at all and you
have in the spoon a piece of vegetable of the shape of the spoon, and as
seen in the cuts.


  WATER.

Rain-water is for cooking purposes, as for other purposes, the best, but
is seldom used, especially in large cities, where it is difficult to
procure it. Another difficulty is, when procured it soon gets foul.

The next best is river-water, or water from lakes.

By boiling, water evaporates its gases and alkali, and is inferior
afterward for cooking purposes, especially for boiling vegetables;
therefore, we earnestly recommend to use the water at the first boiling.

When foul water has to be used for want of other, if no filter,
charcoal, sand, or paper can be had to filter it, it will improve by
boiling it and then exposing it to the air for some time.


  WINES.

Native wines, when pure, are just as good as any other for cooking
purposes.

It is wrong and a great mistake to underrate native wines; they have a
little more acerbity than foreign wines, but are not inferior. It cannot
be otherwise, being grown in a virgin soil, or nearly so. The richer the
soil or the younger the vineyard, the more acid the wine.

Cold nights during the ripening of the fruit make the wine more acid,
not ripening so perfectly.

Wine is a healthy drink, and many invalids would recover much quicker by
a judicious use of it.

Different wines are used in cooking, and we give the names of the best
ones in the different receipts.

A little vinegar may be used as a substitute for wine, but it is very
inferior, and in many dishes it cannot be used at all.

A few dollars spent during the year in wine for cooking purposes, makes
much better and more wholesome dishes.

White wine contains little tannin; it retains nitrogenous matters, and
is free from essential oils; hence the superior flavor and quality of
brandy made with white wines.

It is more aperient and less nutritive than red wine.

Essential oils pass in red wine while it is fermenting.

Wine and sugar with certain fruits are excellent, and are known to
neutralize the crudity of the fruit, such as straw-berries, pears,
peaches, currants, etc.


  MOTTO.

The motto of the New York Cooking Academy is--

_Since we must eat to live, let us prepare our food in such a manner,
that our physical, intellectual, and moral capacities may be extended as
far as is designed by our CREATOR._




  DIVERS RECEIPTS.


  ALMONDS.

Two kinds are used in cooking, the sweet and the bitter.

They are shelled first, then by pouring boiling water on them and
leaving them in it for two or three minutes, they are easily skinned.

They are sometimes used as soon as skinned, and sometimes dried after
being skinned and just before using.

When wanted dried, place them in a pan in a slow oven with the door
open, and turn them occasionally.


  LEMONADE OR ORANGEADE.

Put two ounces of loaf sugar in a quart of water, also the rind of an
orange or one of lemon. Half an hour after strain the whole, and press
into it the juice of the orange, and a few drops of lemon-juice. If
found too strong, add water and sugar. It is a very good drink in
summer, or for evening parties. A little currant jelly may be added to
make a variety.


  LEMONADE WITH BARLEY.

To the above lemonade or orangeade you add, instead of water and sugar,
some barley-water and sugar; it is very good and very refreshing.

Barley-water is made by soaking in lukewarm water a pint of barley,
drain it two or three minutes after; put the barley in a crockery pan,
cover it with cold water (about three quarts), set it on the fire, and
boil till the barley is perfectly cooked; skim off the scum during the
cooking, drain, let cool, and use the water.


  BARLEY SUGAR FOR CHILDREN.

Soak a quart of barley in lukewarm water for two or three minutes, and
drain. Put the barley in a crockery stewpan, with four or five quarts of
water, and set it on a good fire, boil till the barley is overdone, and
then take from the fire, mash it as well as possible and strain,
throwing away what there is in the strainer, and if the remainder does
not make a kind of jelly when cool, the barley has not been boiled
enough.

Mix that jelly with sugar and fry it; it is better than any other candy,
barley being refreshing, and the principal substance of it.


  BAVAROISE WITH CHOCOLATE.

Put in a tin pan a pint of milk, with one ounce of chocolate, and two of
sugar; set it over the fire, but do not allow it to boil; stir well with
a wooden spoon during the process, and when the whole is well mixed,
serve warm in cups.

It is an excellent and wholesome drink in the evening.

_The same with Coffee or Tea._--Proceed as above in every particular,
except that you put in the pan a small cup of coffee or tea instead of
chocolate, and a little more sugar.


  BICHOF.

Put in a crockery tureen two bottles of white wine, with an orange and a
lemon, both cut in slices; cover, and place it in a warm place for about
ten hours; then strain into a vessel, and mix well with the liquor
about a pound of loaf sugar, and a little grated cinnamon.

It may be served warm or cold.

_Another way._--Melt a pound of loaf sugar in half a pint of cold water,
and then mix with it two bottles of white wine, a pinch of grated
cinnamon, the juice of an orange, and that of a lemon, and use. It takes
only a few minutes to make it.

If found too strong, add water and sugar.


  TO PRESERVE BIRDS.

Broil or roast, according to our directions, chickens, ducks, geese,
turkeys, partridges, pheasants, prairie hens, quails, etc.; then carve
them; take the bones out of the pieces, place them in a crockery pot,
which you fill with melted butter or lard, and cover well when cold.
Place the pot in a cool and dry place, and they will keep for months.

When you wish to eat them, take out the quantity you want, and place it
in a frying-pan, with the butter or lard that is around; fry till warm,
and serve.


  BREAD-CRUMBS.

Put slices of stale bread in a slow oven till they are perfectly dried
up. Break them in pieces and reduce them to coarse powder with a rolling
pin; sift them, and they are ready for use.

Bread-crumbs are better than cracker-crumbs; the latter, when reduced to
powder, are too floury, and besides, there is always stale bread enough
in a kitchen to make crumbs.

The above crumbs are rather brown.

_White crumbs._--Cut in rather large dice the soft part of stale bread,
put the pieces in a new and coarse towel, rub between the hands so as
to reduce the pieces of bread to crumbs; pass through a colander or
through a sieve, according to need, coarse or fine, and use.


  BURNT SUGAR.

Take an old tin ladle and place it over a sharp fire, with two ounces of
loaf sugar in it; stir with a stick or skewer till it is thoroughly
black and burnt. Then add, little by little, about one gill of water;
stir a little, boil about four minutes, but not fast, lest it should
boil over the ladle; strain, and it is made.

As soon as cold, bottle it and use when wanted.

It keeps any length of time.

It is used to color broth, sauces, gravies, etc.

It is called _caramel_ in French.


  COFFEE.

It is simple to make coffee. Of course, when properly made, with good
berries, the liquor is good.

When good roasted coffee can be bought, it saves the trouble of roasting
it, and is, or rather ought to be, cheaper than it can be done in a
family.

If coffee is roasted a long time before being used it loses much of its
aroma, therefore a family ought not to roast more than it can use in
about a week, while twenty or twenty-five pounds can be roasted at one
time and by one person.

Three or four different kinds, roasted separately, and properly mixed,
make better coffee than one kind alone.

A good proportion is: to one pound of Java add about four ounces of
Mocha, and four ounces of one or two other kinds.

Good coffee, as well as tea, is said to possess exhilarating
properties.

Its use was not known in Europe before 1650. Neither was the use of
sugar, tobacco, and brandy.

Good coffee cannot be made but by leaching.

The easiest utensil is what is called a filter, or coffee-pot, or
biggin, according to locality, with a top to diffuse the water.

[Illustration]

The coffee-pot called "the French balance" makes the best-flavored
coffee, but it is an expensive one.

[Illustration]

There are several good filters, but the great majority or the people
find them too complicated for daily use.

The bottom of the filter should be of silvered brass-gauze instead of
perforated tin, as it is generally.

Gauze-holes being much smaller than those of perforated tin, the coffee
can be ground much finer, and therefore, all the strength and aroma can
be had; while if ground coarse, it is utterly impossible.

Good coffee cannot be made in a utensil often but wrongly called a
_coffee-pot_, which is nothing but a pot, and something like a tea-pot.

With such a utensil, the grounds must be boiled; and as no liquor can be
boiled without allowing the steam to escape (the steam made by boiling
coffee being its aroma), therefore the best part of the coffee is
evaporated before it is served.

Never grind your coffee until ready to make it.

No matter how air-tight you keep it, the aroma evaporates or is
absorbed.

Coffee can be ground and made as soon as cool; but it is better to let
it stand for about twenty-four hours after being roasted.

If kept as air-tight as possible in a tin-box, it will keep very well
for about a week.

Never buy ground coffee except when you cannot help it.

By taking a pinch of ground coffee and rolling it between wetted
fingers, it will remain in grains, if pure; and will form in a ball if
foreign matters are mixed with it.


  TO ROAST.

In roasting, good coffee swells about thirty-three per cent., and loses
about sixteen per cent. in weight.

Roast once a week or oftener.

Put coffee in the apparatus (cylinder, or drum, or roaster), the
quantity to be according to the size of the roaster, or according to how
much is needed. Have a rather slow fire at first; when the coffee has
swollen, augment the fire, turning, shaking, tossing the roaster,
sometimes fast, sometimes slowly, and take from the fire a little
before it is roasted enough; the roasting will be finished before the
coffee gets cold and before taking it from the roaster, which you
continue turning and shaking as if it were yet on the fire.

A charcoal fire is the handiest, and more easily regulated.

It is well roasted when it evaporates a pleasing odor and when of a
brownish color.

Then take it from the roaster, spread it on a matting or on a piece of
cloth, and put it in a tin-box as soon as cold.

It is exceedingly difficult, if not utterly impossible, to roast coffee
properly by machinery, and for two reasons: in the first place, there is
too much of it in the cylinder to roast evenly, some berries are burned,
others not roasted enough; the other is, that being turned by machinery,
the cylinder is turned regularly and is neither shaken nor tossed; and
even if there were not too much coffee in it, some berries would be much
more roasted than others.


  TO MAKE.

Set a kettle of cold water on the fire. Place the ground coffee in the
filter, and as soon as the water begins to boil, pour just enough of it
over the coffee to wet it. Put the kettle back on the fire, and again,
at the first boiling, pour it over the coffee rather slowly, and till
you have poured enough water to furnish the quantity of coffee required.

If the water does not pass through fast enough, just stop pouring for a
few seconds, that is, long enough to put the kettle back on the fire and
start the boiling again. As soon as the water has passed through, the
coffee is made. The quantity of coffee must be according to the strength
you wish it, and the quantity wanted, or according to age and
constitution.

Four teaspoonfuls make a quart of very good coffee for breakfast. It
would be rather strong for children, but can be diluted to a proper
state with milk.

No matter what quantity of coffee is put in the filter, the liquor must
be clear; the more is used, the blacker the substance is, but it must
never be muddy. If muddy at all, be sure you have not used good coffee.

One pound of good coffee to a quart of water, should make black but
clear coffee.


  CAFE AU LAIT.

This is coffee and milk for breakfast. The milk is set on the fire in a
tin saucepan, and taken off when it rises; then mixed with the coffee,
either in the cup or any kind of vessel. The proportions are pint for
pint.


  CAFE NOIR.

_Cafe noir_ is the name given to the coffee taken after dinner. It is
generally made rather strong. Gentlemen sometimes put liquor in it--a
glass of brandy, or rum, or kirschwasser; and ladies, a little cold
milk.

Taken fifteen or twenty minutes after dinner, it helps digestion. It
excites the faculties of the mind, and gives what physiologists call
"agreeable sensations."

Coffee is nutritious, and to a certain extent prevents waste of the
system.


  CHOCOLATE.

The quantity of chocolate for a certain quantity of milk is according to
taste. Two ounces of chocolate make a good cup of it, and rather thick.

Break the chocolate in pieces, put it in a tin saucepan with a
tablespoonful of water to an ounce of chocolate, and set it on a rather
slow fire. Stir now and then till thoroughly melted.

While the chocolate is melting, set the quantity of milk desired in
another tin saucepan on the fire, and as soon as it rises and when the
chocolate is melted, as directed above, turn the milk into the
chocolate, little by little, beating well at the same time with an
egg-beater. Keep beating and boiling after being mixed, for three or
four minutes; take off and serve.

If both chocolate and milk are good, it will be frothy; and no better or
more nutritious drink can be had.


  CHOCA.

Choca is nothing more nor less than one cup of coffee and milk mixed
with a cup of chocolate, and for breakfast.


  COCOA.

Put in a tea or coffee cup one or two tablespoonfuls of ground cocoa,
pour boiling water or boiling milk on it, little by little, stirring
with a spoon the while; sweeten it to taste. A few drops of essence of
vanilla may be added, according to taste.


  ESSENCE OF SPINACH, OR GREEN ESSENCE.

Put two handfuls of very green and fresh spinach in a mortar and pound
it well. Then put it in a saucepan, set on a rather slow fire, and when
on the point of boiling take it off, pass it through a sieve and use. It
may be kept for some time with a little sugar.


  ESSENCE OF BEEF.

The essence of beef of commerce is well known.

To make essence of beef used in cooking and called _glace_ in French,
set three or four quarts of broth on a slow fire, in a saucepan and
reduce it to jelly. Keep it simmering all the time; it may take twenty
hours to reduce. When properly reduced, it is of a very dark-brown
color and has a very pleasant odor.

When cold, it must be rather hard.

When essence of beef tastes like glue and has an unpleasant odor, it is
not made properly, or with good beef.

If properly made, it will keep any length of time.

It is used to thicken sauces, to decorate boned birds, etc.; when in a
hurry, it may be used to make soup, but, like every thing preserved, is
of course inferior to fresh broth.


  ICING.

Put about three tablespoonfuls of pulverized sugar in a bowl with the
white of a small egg; and then mix and work well for at least five
minutes with a piece of wood. When done it is perfectly white and rather
thick.

Make a kind of funnel with thick, white paper; put the mixture in it,
and by squeezing it out, you make decorations according to fancy, on
cakes, charlotte russe, etc. You make the decorations of the size you
please, by cutting the smaller end of the paper-funnel of the size you
wish.

The mixture may also be spread on cakes with a knife, according to what
kind of decoration is desired.

A charlotte russe may be decorated in the same way, with the same cream
as that used to fill it.


  MEAT JELLIES.

Put in a saucepan two ounces of gelatine with three eggs and shells, a
tablespoonful of salt, the rind of half a lemon, a liquor-glass of rum
or brandy, or a wine-glass of sherry, port, or madeira wine; mix well
the whole. Add one quart of broth, twelve pepper-corns; beat the whole
well with an egg-beater and set on a good fire; stir gently till it
comes to a boil; then move it on a rather slow fire; boil slowly for
about eight minutes and turn into the jelly-bag. Have two bowls at hand
to be used alternately; have one under the bag before turning the jelly
into it; and when it has passed through the bag once, turn it into the
bag again, putting the other bowl under; repeat this three or four
times, and it will be perfectly clear. Just before turning into the bag
the first time, a few drops of burnt sugar are added to give the jelly
an amber color. Use the jelly immediately if wanted in liquid form, as
to fill a meat-pie, etc., or put it on ice to congeal.

_Boned-turkey Jelly._--As soon as the water in which you have boiled a
boned turkey is cold, skim off the fat and strain it. Then proceed
exactly as for meat jelly, except that you take one quart of the above
instead of one quart of beef broth.

_Boned-chicken Jelly._--Prepare the water in which the boned chicken has
been cooked, the same as above; take a quart of it and proceed as for
meat jelly for the rest.

For jelly to decorate any boned bird, the water in which it has been
cooked may be used, as described above.

_Calves'-feet Jelly._--Scald well four calves' feet, and split each in
two lengthwise. Put them in a saucepan with about three pints of water,
two onions, two cloves, two cloves of garlic, six sprigs of parsley, one
of thyme, a stalk of celery if handy, salt, and half a dozen
pepper-corns. Set on the fire, boil gently till well cooked. Serve the
feet with a _poulette_ or _vinaigrette_.

Strain the liquor; put in it two eggs with their shells, salt, rum or
wine, as in meat jelly; beat the whole well with an egg-beater; set on a
good fire, and finish like meat jelly.

_Calf's-head Jelly._--Proceed as for the above in every particular,
except that you use four eggs, having about twice as much liquor,
therefore making twice as much jelly. A little gelatine may be added, if
not found firm enough.


  MEAT GRAVY.

When you are short of gravy, cut a little piece of veal, say half a
pound of the breast or neck piece, or trimmings of veal-cutlets; set on
the fire with about an ounce of butter, and half of a rather small
carrot cut in slices; stir, and when the meat is turning rather brown,
add two or three onions in slices also; stir again till the onions are
nearly fried; when covered with broth or water, add salt, a dozen whole
peppers, a bay-leaf, and two stalks of thyme; boil gently for two or
three hours, and strain.

If it is boiling away, add water to fill up.

Trimmings of mutton, lamb, beef, chicken, or turkey, may be added to the
veal.

In case of hurry, it may be done quickly and by boiling rather fast, but
it is not as good, and there is less of it with the same quantity of
meat.

For a grand dinner, the gravy may be made one or two and even three days
in advance; then simmer it for five or six hours.


  MELONS.

Musk-melons are always served as a _hors-d'oeuvre_, but must be eaten
immediately after soup, or the first thing of all if no soup is served.

It is a great mistake to serve melons as a dessert.

Water-melons, though eaten abundantly, are considered very unwholesome
by the great majority of doctors, chemists, and physiologists.

Musk-melons are served in slices with sugar, or with salt and pepper,
according to taste.


  MEUNIERE.

Mix well together in a cup one teaspoonful of flour with a tablespoonful
of cold water.

It is used to thicken sauces and different dishes.


  MINT.

Put four sprigs of mint into a quart of brandy, cork well, or cover
air-tight if in a pot, and leave thus forty-eight hours; then strain
through a cloth. Put half a pound of loaf sugar in a stewpan with a pint
of water, set it on the fire, and, at the first boiling, pour it into
the quart of brandy; cover with a cloth, let it cool, and again strain
the whole through a fine cloth. Bottle and cork carefully, and use when
wanted.

A small liquor-glass of it is very good for stomach-ache; it is also
useful after having eaten any thing difficult of digestion.


  PANADE.

Break in pieces the soft part of a small stale loaf of bread; put it in
a tin saucepan, cover it with cold water, and leave thus about an hour;
then mash it well, set it on the fire, add salt, butter, and sugar, to
taste; simmer about an hour, then add again two yolks of eggs beaten
with two tablespoonfuls of cream or milk; mix the whole well together,
and serve.

It makes an excellent food for infants.


  PAP.

Put an ounce of butter in a tin saucepan, set it on the fire, and when
melted, turn into it two tablespoonfuls of flour, thoroughly mixed with
half a pint of milk; stir with a wooden spoon, boil gently for about
twelve minutes, stirring the while; take off, turn into a bowl, add salt
and sugar to taste, and use.

If wanted richer, an egg may be mixed with the flour and milk, or a yolk
of egg may be added as soon as taken from the fire.


  RAISINS.

When the stems of raisins or of currants are removed, put them in a
bowl, dust them well with flour, move them round a little, then turn
them into a sieve and shake them well. This process will remove the sand
as well as washing them, and will not take away the sweetness.


  SANDWICHES.

These are too well known to require any direction.


  SAUSAGE-MEAT.

Butchers generally, with an eye to economy, make sausage-meat of bad or
tainted pork.

We recommend our readers, as far as possible, never to buy sausage-meat
ready made, but to make it themselves, or have it made according to
their directions.

A chopping-machine costs very little, and saves a great deal of work,
besides chopping much better than can be done by hand.

The proportions are: one pound of lean pork and one pound of lean veal,
chopped very fine, well mixed, and both very fresh. Season with salt,
pepper, nutmeg and clove grated, and with cinnamon, if liked.

A yolk of egg may be added to a pound of meat.

It may also be made with one pound of veal and half a pound or less of
pork, or with veal only or pork only, according to taste.


  SOUSE.

Put three ounces of butter in a saucepan, and set it on the fire; when
melted, add two carrots and two onions sliced, stir now and then till
they begin to turn brown; then add about three pints of warm water, half
a pint of vinegar, one clove of garlic, four sprigs of parsley, one of
thyme, a clove, a bay-leaf, six pepper-corns, a little grated nutmeg,
and salt. Simmer about an hour, strain, and it is ready for use.

_Another._--Put two quarts of vinegar and about ten quarts of water in a
stone or crockery vessel, with four cloves of garlic, a handful of
parsley, six cloves, four stalks of thyme, four bay-leaves, half a
nutmeg grated, three or four carrots, and three or four onions sliced, a
little salt, and two dozen pepper-corns. Stir and mix the whole well,
and it is ready for use.

Pieces of mutton, beef, pork, venison, and bear-meat, may be soaked in
one of the above preparations from four to six days before cooking them.
A piece of tough meat will be more tender and juicy after being soaked.

More or less may be made, according to the size of the piece of meat.


  TEA.

There are many ways of making tea; we might say that every one makes it
in his own way; but, after many experiments and much information, we
have found the following to be the best:

Warm the teapot either by pouring boiling water in it and emptying it,
or by placing it on a corner of the range.

Then put good tea in it (the quantity to be according to the strength
and also to the quantity you want), and pour boiling water on the
leaves, just enough to wet them; leave thus about one minute, then pour
on all the water you want.

Let it steep no longer than about six minutes, and not less than four
minutes, before drawing it.

If allowed to steep longer than six minutes, all the astringency of the
tea is extracted, and it acts and has a bad effect on the nervous
system, besides losing most of its aroma.

Chemists and physiologists generally recommend black tea, as not
affecting the nervous system as much as green tea.

Tea being naturally very astringent, should never be served at
breakfast.

Taken after dinner, instead of _cafe noir_, it has the same effect, and
brandy may be mixed with it as in coffee.

Tea is excellent in damp climates and marshy countries, but it must be
taken after a substantial meal.

Drinking warm tea while eating causes the food to pass through the
system without nourishing it, or supplying its waste.


  TOAST.

Cut several slices of bread of even size, and spread some anchovy-butter
on them; cut anchovies in small strips, lengthwise, lay them on the
bread also, and then spread over some hard-boiled egg chopped fine, and
on it some parsley also chopped fine, finish with capers here and there.

Place the toast or slices of bread on a dish, tastefully arranged all
around, a few sprigs of parsley in the middle, and you have a fine
_hors-d'oeuvre_.

Sardines, Dutch herrings, or red herrings may be used the same as
anchovies.


  WELSH RAREBIT.

This dish is not generally understood. It is thought by many to be Welsh
rabbit, that is, a rabbit prepared _Welsh fashion_.

It is not a rabbit, but Welsh cheese (a certain kind only, and prepared
for that purpose), melted to a certain degree, and then spread on toast
of Welsh bread.

Grate some Gloucester or Gruyere cheese and pepper it with Cayenne
pepper. Fry some slices of bread with a little butter, but on one side
only, until perfectly yellow, then spread a thick coat of grated cheese
on the fried side of the bread, place the slices in a baking-pan, put
them in a pretty warm oven, take off when it begins to melt, and serve
warm.

Then you have as good a Welsh rarebit as can be made here. The receipt
was given to us by an English lady.




  POTAGES OR SOUPS.


Potage is the modern word for soup, and is used in bills of fare
everywhere.

Three kinds of liquor are used to make potages: broth, milk, and water.

Besides the liquor, meat, fish, and vegetables are used.

The richest potages are made with _consomme_ and some other compounds;
such as bread, Italian pastes, vegetables, etc.

_Consomme_ means rich broth; literally, it means consumed, perfect, that
is, properly reduced and partly consumed, as it is the case in making
it. _Consomme_ is broth reduced to a certain point, according to want or
taste.

_Broth._--Broth is to good cooking what wheat is to bread. Dishes (with
some exceptions) prepared without broth are, to those prepared with it,
what rye or corn bread is to wheat bread. Broth, and especially
_consomme_, are to old age what milk is to the infant. Broth is called
_bouillon_ in France, and _stock_ in England. The word _pot-au-feu_
means the meat, vegetables, seasonings, spices, and the "pot" or
soup-kettle itself, _i. e._, every thing made use of in making broth.
The popular meaning of the term in France is, the soup and the beef and
vegetables served as _releves_; and, with the working-classes, the only
thing (with bread, wine, and fruit) composing the family dinner. The
French army is fed on this _pot-au-feu_ three hundred and sixty days in
the year.

It is a great mistake to believe that bones or veal make good broth; by
boiling or simmering bones or veal, you obtain a gelatinous liquid, but
not a rich broth with a pleasant flavor. When properly made, broth is
clear. If milky, it has been made with bones, veal, or very inferior
beef.

_Broth for Potages._--Take three pounds of good, lean, fresh beef, from
any part except the shin. There must not be more than two ounces of bone
to a pound of meat, and the less bone the better. Place the meat in a
soup-kettle or iron saucepan lined with tin, with three quarts of cold
water and salt, and set it on a good fire. After about thirty minutes,
the scum or albumen of the meat will gather on the surface, and the
water will commence boiling. Now place the kettle on a more moderate
fire, add one gill of cold water, and begin to skim off the scum, which
will take only a few minutes. Then add one middle-sized carrot, half as
much turnip, one middle-sized leek, a stalk of celery, one of parsley, a
bay-leaf, one onion with two cloves stuck in it, and two cloves of
garlic. Keep the kettle between simmering and boiling heat for about
five hours. Dish the meat with carrot, turnip, and leek around it, and
serve it as a _releve_. Strain the broth, and it is ready for use.

If the broth is required to be richer, use more beef and less water, but
follow the same process; if weaker, use more water and less beef, but
still follow the same process.

_Broth for Sauces and Gravies._--Place in a soup-kettle or saucepan
fresh bones of beef, mutton, lamb, veal, or poultry--of either, or of
all; also, bones of the same meats from roasted pieces; also trimmings
of the same, if very fresh, with one quart of cold water to every pound
of bones or meat; skim it like the preceding, add the same vegetables
and seasonings, and simmer for at least six hours. Then skim off very
carefully all the fat on the surface, pass the remainder through a
strainer or a sieve, and it is ready for use. This broth is certainly
very inferior to the preceding one, but it is excellent for sauces and
gravies, and is very cheaply made. It may be used for potages also; but,
as we have said above, it is very gelatinous, and cannot be compared
with the highly nutritious beef-broth.

Broth that is not to be used immediately must be cooled quickly after
being strained, as the quicker it is cooled the longer it keeps. As soon
as cold, put it in a stone jar or crockery vessel, and place it in a
cool, dry, and dark place. It will keep three or four days in winter,
but only one day in summer. If the weather is stormy, it will not keep
even for twelve hours; it turns sour very quickly.

I do not put parsnips or thyme in broth, the taste of these two
vegetables being too strong. They really neutralize the fine aroma of
broth. Even in this nineteenth century there are some pretty good cooks
who put thyme and parsnip in broth, but they do it by routine. Routine
is in every thing the greatest enemy of progress. Ancient cookery used
to put in the _pot_ (old name for soup-kettle) a burnt onion to give an
amber color to the broth. This has exactly the same effect as thyme and
parsnip, giving it a bad taste, and neutralizing the flavor given to the
broth by the osmazome of the meat. When broth of an amber color is
desired, add to it a few drops of burnt sugar, the receipt for making
which will be found elsewhere.

_Consomme._--There are two ways of making _consomme_: one is to make
broth as above, with the exception that five pounds of lean beef,
instead of three, are used with three quarts of water, and simmered from
seven to eight hours, instead of five, the vegetables and seasonings
being the same; or by boiling broth gently till properly reduced.

The other way is to roast, until they are only one-third done, one, two,
or three fowls, not under two years old; then place them in a
soup-kettle with three pounds of lean beef; wet with three quarts of
cold water; skim off as above directed; add the same vegetables and
seasonings as for broth for potages. After having simmered the whole for
three hours, the fowl or fowls must be taken out of the kettle, and the
rest is to be simmered for about three hours longer. The meat,
vegetables, and seasonings are then taken from the kettle or saucepan;
the liquor is strained, and that liquor is the best _consomme_ that can
be made; or by boiling the same, gently, in three quarts of good broth,
you make _consomme_ also.

The reason for directing to use one, two, or three fowls is, that the
more fowls used, the better and richer the broth. The fowls after having
been thus used may be prepared in salad, and make a very excellent dish.

One pound of beef is enough to make broth for a potage for three or four
persons.

Always use fresh meat; meat with a venison taste or tainted would spoil
if not entirely destroy the broth.

_To clarify Broth._--If not as clear as wanted, beat the white of an egg
with a gill of cold broth, and turn into the broth; boil gently about
ten minutes, and strain through a cloth or towel.

Any kind of potage made with broth may be made with _consomme_. It may
also be made with water, adding butter. With _consomme_ it is richer,
and with water much inferior, than with broth.

When a rump-piece is used to make broth, it is better to bone it first,
and take it from the soup-kettle after three or four hours; it is served
as a _releve_, or prepared as cold beef. The broth is finished as
directed; the bones and vegetables being kept on the fire longer than
the meat.

Chicken and turkey broth are often called _potage de sante_ (potage of
health).

_Chicken._--Roast or bake till turning yellow, a chicken over two years
old. Put it in a soup-kettle with three pints of water, and set it on a
rather slow fire; skim off the scum, add a middling-sized onion, a leek,
a few stalks of chervil if handy, a middling-sized head of lettuce, and
salt; simmer about three hours. Take out the chicken and vegetables,
skim off the fat, strain, and use. This broth is excellent for a weak
stomach, and is easy of digestion. The chicken is served in salad.

_Turkey._--Procure a rather old turkey and roast or bake it till about
one-third done; put it in a soup-kettle with about a pint of water to a
pound of meat, and set it on a rather slow fire. As soon as the scum
comes on the surface, skim it off carefully; then add two onions, two
leeks, two or three heads of lettuce, a small handful of chervil if
handy, and salt. Simmer about five hours.

Use the broth as chicken-broth above, and serve the turkey in salad.

_Fish_ (also called _a la Lucullus_).--Slice three middling-sized
onions and fry them with one ounce of butter till turning yellow; add
three or four pounds of fish (bass, pike, trout, salmon, and the like),
any fish having a firm and compact flesh, of one or several kinds; add
also two carrots, two onions, and one leek, all sliced; four stalks of
parsley, one of thyme, one clove of garlic, a bay-leaf, one clove, six
pepper-corns, salt; cover the whole with cold water, set on a good but
not brisk fire, boil gently for about two hours. If the water is boiling
away, add some more; then strain, and use.

This broth may be used for _bisque_ and fish sauces, instead of
beef-broth.

It may be made rich; for instance, instead of three pounds of fish, use
six, seven, eight pounds, or more, and seasonings in proportion.

Louis XV. was on a visit to the monastery of Saint Denis one day during
Lent; after having walked all over the grounds and gardens, he was
offered a cup of broth by the superior.

Being a little fatigued, he took the cup and drank the whole at one
draught.

In going back to Versailles, one of his suite, who did not like the
monk-superior, adroitly alluded to the cup of broth, and managed to
persuade the king that the monk had done it on purpose; that is, had
made the king partake of meat-broth, when it was forbidden by the
Church.

The next day the monk-superior was sent for and brought before the king.
On hearing the object of the summons, he asked the king if the broth had
indisposed him. Being answered in the negative, he begged to be allowed
to prepare the same broth before the king himself, which he did, and
from that time till his death the king used to send several hundred
pounds of fish during Lent to the monks of Saint-Denis.

_Frog._--Skin and put the hind-legs of two dozen of frogs in cold water
for an hour; drain and put them in a saucepan, and set it on a slow
fire; stir now and then till they are turning yellow, then take them off
and chop the flesh rather fine; put back in the pan with a carrot
sliced, a stalk of celery and one leek, both chopped, a little salt, and
cover the whole with water. Simmer for about two hours; mash the whole
through a colander, add butter which you stir and mix in, and it is
ready for use.

This broth, taken warm before retiring, is excellent for persons having
a cough or cold.

It is also excellent for consumptive persons, and is only second to
snail-broth.

_Another._--Take the hind-legs of fifty well-skinned green frogs, put
them in cold water and a little salt for half an hour--drain them; then
put them in a crockery kettle, with a leek, half a carrot, two stalks of
celery, a middling-sized parsnip, a turnip, two onions, one clove of
garlic, two ounces of fat bacon, a little salt, and white pepper; cover
the whole well with cold water, set on the fire, simmer gently about
four hours; strain, pour on _croutons_, and serve.

The hind-legs of the frogs are taken from the strainer, placed on a
dish, and served at breakfast the next day, with a white sauce, or in
fricassee, as a chicken.

_Game._--Roast or bake, till about one-third done, two prairie-hens, and
put them in a soup-kettle with about one pound of lean beef, salt, and
five pints of water. Set the kettle on a rather slow fire, skim off the
scum when it gathers on the surface, and then add half a carrot, two
stalks of parsley, one of celery, one onion with a clove stuck in it, a
bay-leaf, six pepper-corns, and two cloves of garlic. Simmer about three
hours, and take the birds out of the kettle; simmer then two hours
longer; strain, and the broth is ready for use.

Game-broth is warming and stimulating; it may be taken alone, or
prepared with _croutons_, rice, vermicelli, or other Italian pastes, the
same as beef-broth.

The prairie-hens are served in _salmis_, and the beef is served as
boiled beef.

_Snail._--Clean and prepare twenty-five snails as directed. Put them in
a saucepan, with a carrot, an onion, and a head of lettuce, all chopped,
a small handful of chervil, a few leaves of sorrel, and a little salt;
cover the whole with three pints of cold water. Boil slowly for about
three hours, strain the broth, add a little butter to it, and it is
ready for use.

A tumblerful of this broth, taken warm before retiring, is certainly the
best thing for a consumptive person.

It is also excellent for a cough.

Just salt the snails to taste, and eat them as they are, warm or cold.

_Veal._--Procure two pounds of veal, from the neck or breast piece. Put
the meat in a soup-kettle with two quarts of cold water and a little
salt; set it on a good fire, and skim off the scum as soon as it gathers
on the surface. When skimmed, add a head of lettuce, a leek (and a few
stalks of chervil if handy); simmer for about three hours; strain, and
use.

This broth, as well as chicken and turkey broth, is excellent for
convalescent persons.

It may be made richer by putting a little more meat, according to taste;
but generally the physician gives directions.

_Another._--Soak a calf's liver in cold water for two hours, clean and
wash it well; put it in a soup-kettle with about three pints of cold
water, salt, boil gently for an hour and a half, and then add a handful
of water-cresses; simmer fifteen minutes longer, strain and use.

_Another._--Proceed as above in every particular, except that you use a
handful of chervil instead of water-cresses.

_Another._--Use three or four leeks instead of water-cresses, and
proceed as above for every other particular.

The last three especially make a very refreshing drink, and are a great
relief in some cases of fever.

_Vegetable Broth_ (called also _Bouillon Maigre_).--Scrape, clean, and
slice three carrots and three turnips, peel three onions; fry the whole
with a little butter till it turns rather yellow; and then add two
plants of celery cut in pieces, three or four leeks, also cut in pieces;
stir and fry the whole for about six minutes. When fried, add also one
clove of garlic, salt, pepper, two cloves, two stalks of parsley, a
little nutmeg grated; cover with about three quarts of water. Keep on a
rather slow fire, skim off the scum carefully, and then simmer for about
three hours. Strain, and use.

This liquor is called vegetable broth, and is used instead of broth in
time of Lent by persons who do not want to use beef-broth.

_Another._--Proceed as above, and with the same vegetables till they are
fried. Then add salt, pepper, two cloves of garlic, four stalks of
parsley, three cloves, a little nutmeg grated, two quarts of white beans
previously soaked in cold water for twenty-four hours, and five or six
quarts of water. Skim it as above; simmer for about four hours; strain,
and use.

The beans, carrots, turnips, and leeks may be mashed through a colander
and served in _puree_.

_Another._--Proceed as above in every particular, with the exception
that instead of using beans, you use peas, lentils, chestnuts, or samp.
Peas and lentils are soaked in water only for four or five hours.
Chestnuts must be shelled. Some other vegetables may be added, according
to taste, and also according to the nature of the vegetables.

_Another._--Clean and put in a bowl a head of lettuce, a handful of
sorrel, same of chervil, same of purslane, and all chopped fine; pour
over nearly a quart of boiling water, add two ounces of butter, cover
the bowl with a wet towel; leave thus half an hour, and strain.

When cold it makes a very refreshing drink, and is taken morning and
evening with salt, to taste.

It may also be taken warm.

_A la Minute, or made quickly._--Cut four ounces of fat salt pork in
dice and set it on the fire in a saucepan; stir, and when it is turning
rather brown add one onion chopped, and half a middling-sized carrot,
sliced; stir, and when they are partly fried, add also two pounds of
lean beef cut in small dice; stir and fry for five minutes. Then pour in
it about three pints of boiling water, salt, boil gently about forty
minutes. Strain, and use.

The beef may be served with the broth, or separately as an _entree_,
with a _piquante_, _ravigote_, or Robert sauce.

_Bisque of Lobster._--Boil one or several lobsters as directed, and when
cold split the tail in two, lengthwise, take the flesh out of the shell,
remove the black vein that is on the back, take out the meat of the two
large claws, and keep the flesh of the claws and tail for the following
day's breakfast.

For a _bisque_, nothing is thrown away but the head, stomach, and black
vein. The head is the part immediately under the eyes; the stomach is a
small, round pouch immediately behind the head; and the vein runs from
the stomach to the end of the tail.

Put all the rest, shell, small claws, all the matter found in the large
shell (green, white, or yellow), in a mortar and pound well. Then put a
tablespoonful of butter in a saucepan, set it on the fire, and when the
butter is melted, put what is in the mortar in, stir with a wooden spoon
for about ten minutes, then add one pint of warm broth, stir for about
twenty minutes, and strain. Put the liquor back on the fire with about
four ounces of toasted bread, boil five minutes, and mash through a
colander. Put the liquor back again on the fire, add one quart of broth,
boil gently ten minutes, and turn into the soup-dish.

While it is boiling, chop fine the coral-piece of the lobster or
lobsters, knead it with a piece of butter of about the same bulk, then
rub both through a wire sieve; put them in the soup-dish with _croutons_
and about two or three ounces of the flesh of the lobster cut in very
small dice. Turn the broth into the soup-dish also, and as directed
above, and serve warm.

When there is no coral in the lobster or lobsters, knead a hard-boiled
yolk of egg with butter in its stead.

Use one, two, three, or more lobsters, according to how much soup is
wanted. It is not costly, because the flesh, or most of it, is kept to
make a salad the next day, for breakfast or lunch.

The salad might be served the same day at dinner, but lobster is a
rather heavy food, and it is more prudent not to eat any late in the
day.

_Bisque of Lobster a la Colbert._--Make a _bisque_ as above, and while
it is on the fire, poach as directed as many eggs as there will be
persons at dinner; put them in the soup-dish instead of _croutons_, and
serve as above.

_Of Crabs._--Proceed as for a bisque of lobster in every particular,
except that you use hard-shell crabs instead of lobster.

_The same a la Colbert._--Add to the above as many poached eggs as you
have guests.

_Of Craw-fish (Bisque d'Ecrevisses)._--Our readers who have been in
Europe will certainly remember the name of one of the best soups that
can be made. It is made of craw-fish the same as with lobster, and is
certainly more delicate than a _bisque_ of lobster or of crabs. (See
Craw-fish for other particulars.)

A _bisque_ of craw-fish may also be served _a la Colbert_ the same as a
_bisque_ of lobster.

_Bouillabaisse._--The real _bouillabaisse_ is made in Marseilles; they
make an imitation of it in Bordeaux, and in many other parts of France
and the Continent; but, like a Welsh rarebit prepared out of Wales, it
is very inferior to the real one. However, we will give the receipt to
make it here, and as good as possible with the fish that can be
procured.

Put a gill of sweet-oil in a tin saucepan and set it on a sharp fire;
when hot, add two onions and two cloves of garlic sliced; stir so as to
partly fry them, and then take from the fire. Put also in the pan three
pounds of fish, such as haddock, halibut, turbot, white-fish--of all if
possible, but at least of two kinds; also a dozen muscles, just blanched
and taken from the shell (some put them whole, properly cleaned). The
fish is cut in pieces about two inches long. Then add one gill of
Catawba or Sauterne wine, a bay-leaf, two cloves, two slices of lemon,
the juice of a tomato, salt, pepper, a pinch of saffron, cover with
cold water, and set the pan back on a brisk fire. After about thirty
minutes add a teaspoonful of chopped parsley; boil ten minutes longer,
and it is done.

The pieces of fish are then placed on a dish and served.

Put in a deep dish, and to be served at the same time, some slices of
bread, over which you turn the sauce through a strainer.

One slice of bread and one piece of fish is served to each person, also
some sauce.

It is put in two different dishes, to avoid breaking the pieces of fish.

There are over a hundred ways of making a _bouillabaisse_; the above is
one of the best.

There are also about as many ways of spelling the same.

A _bouillabaisse_ is served as a soup.


  POTAGES.

_A la Colbert._--Scrape carrots and turnips and cut them in small dice
or with a vegetable spoon; add green peas and string-beans, if handy,
the beans cut in pieces; set them on the fire in a pan with cold water
and salt; boil gently till done, and drain. Put them back on the fire,
covered with warm broth, salt to taste, boil gently about two or three
minutes, and turn into the soup-dish, in which you have put as many
poached eggs as there are or will be persons at table. A poached egg
with soup is served to every person. Proportions of broth and vegetables
according to taste.

_Julienne._--Scrape two carrots and two turnips and cut them in pieces
about an inch and a half long; cut slices lengthwise about one-eighth of
an inch thick, then cut again across, so as to make square strips. Put
them in a saucepan with about two ounces of butter, three tablespoonfuls
of cabbage chopped fine, and half a middling-sized onion, also chopped;
set on the fire and stir till about half fried. Add broth to make it as
you wish, thin or thick; boil gently till done; salt to taste, skim off
the fat, and serve. It takes about two hours.

_Julienne with Rice._--Boil two ounces of rice in water and a little
salt, till about three-quarters done; drain and put in the julienne
after having added the broth; finish as above.

_Julienne with Barley._--Boil barley till done; add it to the _julienne_
at the same time the broth is added, and serve as the above.

_Julienne aux Croutons._--Put some _croutons_ in the soup-dish, and when
the _julienne_ is done, pour it over them, and serve.

_Brunoise._--Put an ounce of butter in a saucepan on the fire, and when
melted, add one carrot, one turnip, a little celery, all cut in dice;
stir till they turn yellow, then add about a quart of broth, a
middling-sized leek cut in pieces, a few leaves of lettuce and of
sorrel, if handy, and a pinch of sugar. Simmer about two hours; skim off
the fat; add a few drops of burnt sugar to color.

Have _croutons_ in the soup-dish, turn the potage over them, and serve.

_Brunoise with Rice._--Proceed as above, except that you add from two to
four ounces of boiled rice to the potage ten minutes before taking from
the fire. Serve without croutons.

_Another._--Use boiled barley instead of boiled rice.

_A la Monaco._--Put some thin slices of stale bread in the soup-dish,
sprinkle pulverized sugar and orange-rind grated all over. Pour boiling
milk over; cover the dish for five minutes, and serve.

_A la Regence._--Put about two dozen _quenelles_ made with chicken into
the soup-dish with half a pint of boiled green peas; turn boiling
_consomme_ over, and serve warm.

_A la Royale._--Make a custard with a dozen yolks of eggs, about the
same volume of good cream, season with sugar, salt, and a little nutmeg;
cook, and when perfectly cold, cut it in slices and again cut in fancy
shapes with paste-cutters or with a knife; place it in the soup-dish,
pour boiling consomme gently over, and serve warm.

_Potage Printanier_ (called also _Jardiniere_ and _a la Paysanne_).--It
is a potage _julienne_, to which is added the top or eatable part of six
asparagus, six turnip-rooted red radishes, and two or three
tablespoonfuls of green peas. They are fried, boiled, and served with
the other vegetables.

_Veloute._--Put yolks of eggs in the soup-dish and beat them a little
with cold or lukewarm broth; then pour boiling broth over them, little
by little, stirring the while, and serve warm.

It is made thin or thick, according to taste.

_With Arrow-root._--Set broth in a saucepan on the fire, and as soon as
it boils, sprinkle some arrow-root into it, stirring the while with a
wooden spoon; boil gently for about half an hour, stirring now and then
the while, and serve warm, adding salt to taste.

Milk or _consomme_ may be used instead of broth.

If you use milk, add a very little salt and sugar, to taste.

The proportion of arrow-root to a certain quantity of broth is according
to taste; it can be made thick or thin.

_With Corn-starch._--Proceed as for arrow-root.

_With Bread._--This is the simplest of all. Dry some slices of bread,
either stale or fresh, in the oven, place them in the soup-dish, pour
boiling broth over them, cover the dish for two or three minutes, and
serve.

_With Fecula._--Proceed as for arrow-root. Being finer, it does not
require more than about twelve or fifteen minutes.

_With Barley._--Wash the barley in cold water, then drop it in boiling
broth, little by little, stirring the while; when in, keep simmering
till perfectly done, which you ascertain easily by tasting; add then
salt to taste, a pinch of sugar, and serve warm.

It must be stirred occasionally while on the fire.

_With Gruel_ (_French Gruau_).--It is made as with arrow-root.

_With Indian Meal._--Proceed as with arrow-root.

_With Sago._--Sago must be boiled gently about an hour; but for the
rest, proceed as with arrow-root in every particular.

_With Semoule._--With _semoule_ it is the same as with arrow-root,
except that it is boiled only about fifteen minutes.

_With Tapioca._--Tapioca is prepared like arrow-root, but must be boiled
about forty-five minutes.

All the above, like arrow-root, may be prepared with _consomme_, or with
milk, as well as with broth.

_With Giblets._--Throw the giblets in boiling water and a little salt,
boil for ten minutes, take off and drain. Drop them in broth, boil
gently till done, and turn the whole into the soup dish, in which you
have some leeks, boiled and cut in pieces. Serve warm.

Some _croutons_ may be added, and chervil chopped fine, just before
turning into the soup-dish; or they may be placed in the soup-dish
before pouring in the broth.

_With Mackerel._--Clean, prepare, and cut in pieces about one inch and a
half long, a mackerel weighing about one pound and a half; fry it with
two ounces of butter till it turns rather brown, then cover with nearly
a quart of water; add a few slices of carrot, same of turnip, a small
onion, two or three stalks of parsley, salt, pepper, a clove of garlic,
and a stalk of celery if handy; boil slowly for about an hour; mash
gently through a colander, put what has passed through the colander back
on the fire, add a little butter, give one more boil, turn into the soup
dish over _croutons_, and serve.

_With new Carrots._--Take small, young carrots, clean and wash them,
then blanch them for about five minutes. Set them on the fire, cover
with broth or _consomme_; boil gently till done, and serve.

_Another._--With carrots and peas. Proceed as above till the carrots are
half done, then add blanched green peas; finish the cooking, and serve.

_Another._--Make as the above, but using one or two heads of
cabbage-lettuce, blanched for two minutes, instead of green peas.

_Fancy Potage._--Take twelve very small rolls; cut off one end and
remove all the soft part of it; fill them with _quenelles_ of chicken;
replace the piece cut off as well as possible; place them in the
soup-dish; pour boiling _consomme_ or good broth over them; cover the
dish for ten minutes, and serve warm.

_With Vermicelli._--Drop the vermicelli in boiling water, and in which
you have put a little salt; boil ten minutes, drain, drop again in cold
water, drain again and put it in boiling broth; boil ten minutes; add
salt to taste, and serve.

_With Macaroni._--Proceed as for vermicelli in every particular, except
that it takes twice as long to cook.

_With Macaroni and Cheese._--Proceed as for the above, and when done,
put grated cheese in the soup-dish, turn the macaroni over it, and
serve.

_With Italian Pastes._--No matter of what shape are the pastes, proceed
as for vermicelli; the only difference is in the time of cooking, which
depends on the size.

_Consomme_ may be used instead of broth. If milk is used, sugar must be
added.

_With Macaroni a la Corinne._--Set two quarts of cold water on the fire,
with an ounce of salt, and two ounces of butter; at the first boil, drop
into it four ounces of macaroni; boil five minutes, and drain.
Immediately drop the macaroni in boiling _consomme_, and boil gently
till done. Drain it again and place a layer of it in the soup-dish, over
the macaroni; place a thin layer of Parmesan cheese grated; then a layer
of _macedoine_ of vegetables; then again, a layer of macaroni, one of
cheese, etc.; pour _consomme_ to taste on the whole, and serve warm.

_With Macaroni a la Medici_ (also called _a la Napolitaine_).--Proceed
as for macaroni _a la Corinne_ in every particular, with the exception
that you put also in the soup-dish a layer of _quenelles_ of chicken
over that of _macedoine_ of vegetables, and serve in the same way.

The _quenelles_ are boiled till done, in broth in which you put a few
sprigs of mignonette.

_Another._--Add to the above about a gill of thick tomato-sauce, just
before pouring the _consomme_ over the macaroni, etc.

_Macaroni a la Romulus._--Prepare eight ounces of macaroni as directed
for macaroni _a la Corinne_; place a layer of it in the soup-dish; then
over it a layer of _quenelles_ of chicken; over the _quenelles_, a thin
layer of grated Parmesan cheese; then a layer of thin slices of salt
beef tongue, boiled and skimmed; over the latter a layer of sweetbreads
boiled in broth and cut in thin slices also; and lastly a layer of thin
slices of boiled flounders. Several layers of each of the above may be
placed in the soup dish, in the same order; then boiling _consomme_ is
poured over the whole; the dish is covered, put in a warm place for ten
minutes, and served.

Although this dish is a regular potage, and served as such, still many
Italians make a meal of it.

_With Macaroni a La Rossini._--Proceed as for macaroni _a la Corinne_
above, with two exceptions: first, that you add a layer of _quenelles_
of partridge; and second, that you use _consomme_ of partridge.

_With Macaroni a la St. Pierre._--Proceed also as for potage macaroni _a
la Corinne_ as far as placing a layer of macaroni in the soup-dish; then
put over it a layer of boiled soft roe of fish; over which put a thin
layer of grated Parmesan cheese; then a layer of _quenelles_ of fish;
another layer of macaroni; over it, a layer of boiled thin slices of
salmon; macaroni again, etc. Pour boiling _consomme_ over the whole, and
serve.

Although bearing the name of Saint Pierre (St. Peter), the above dish
has not been devised by the saint; but, like all the above, save that _a
la Corinne_, it has been invented by monks.

_With Nouilles._--Set broth on the fire in a saucepan, and at the first
boiling take the _nouilles_ from the water with a skimmer and put in the
broth, stir occasionally and boil gently till done. The proportions are
according to taste. The more broth used for a certain quantity of
_nouilles_ the thinner the soup will be, and _vice versa_. Salt to
taste, and serve.

_With Potatoes._--Cut about half a pint of potatoes with a vegetable
spoon (it is understood half a pint when cut, the rest being used to
make mashed potatoes), and blanch them for three minutes, drain and put
them in boiling broth; boil gently till about half done, add then two or
three tablespoonfuls of green peas; finish the cooking; and just before
serving add a pinch of sugar, salt to taste, turn into the soup-dish,
and serve with or without croutons.

_With Quenelles._--Drop _quenelles_ in broth; boil gently till done, and
serve.

The proportion according to taste. Half a dozen _quenelles_ for each
person, and about half a pint of broth, make a good proportion.

_With Rice._--Put boiled rice in the soup-dish, turn boiling broth over
it, and serve warm.

_With Turnips._--When clean, cut the turnips in slices, drop them in
boiling water, add a little salt, boil for five minutes, and drain. Set
them on the fire in a saucepan, cover them with milk, and boil gently
till done. Mash them through a colander, put them back on the fire with
milk, butter, a little sugar and salt; stir and boil gently a few
minutes; then add a yolk of egg for two turnips, stir in also two or
three tablespoonfuls of cream; stir, but do not boil; put some
_croutons_ in the soup-dish, turn the turnips over, and serve.

_Puree of Split Peas._--The proportions vary according to taste; the
more peas that are used with a certain quantity of broth, the thicker
the potage will be, and _vice versa_.

Soak one pint of split peas in cold water over night and drain. Put them
in a saucepan with a few slices of carrot, same of turnip, same of onion
and salt. Cover with cold water, set on the fire and boil till done.
Drain, and then mash through a colander. Put back on the fire with warm
broth to taste--that is, to make the potage thin or thick, season with
salt or pepper; boil gently for five minutes, stirring the while; turn
into the soup-dish over _croutons_, and serve warm. It may be served
without _croutons_.

_Puree of Green Peas._--It is sometimes called _a la Chantilly_, or _a
la Francaise_. Put cold water and a little salt on the fire, and at the
first boiling throw the peas in; if they are very tender, leave them in
only a few seconds; if large and rather hard, boil one or two minutes;
drain, mash them through a colander, and finish as the above.

_Puree of Dry Beans._--White and dry beans have several names, but no
matter what kind, they are prepared alike. If you are not sure that the
beans are new, soak them in cold water for about twenty-four hours, and
drain. Cook, mash, and serve them the same as split peas.

_Puree of Lentils._--Wash the lentils in cold water and proceed as for
split peas for the rest.

_Puree of Peas._--Proceed as for split peas.

_With Lima Beans._--Proceed as with green peas.

_With Potatoes._--Steam potatoes, then peel and mash them through a
colander. Put them back on the fire with broth, butter, and salt to
taste; stir, boil a few minutes, and serve with _croutons_. Water or
milk may be used instead of broth.

_With Pumpkins._--Peel, take away the seed and cut the pumpkin in small
pieces; put them in a stewpan with water just enough to cover them, a
little salt and white pepper, set on the fire and take off when cooked;
throw away the water, mash and strain the pumpkin, put it back in the
stewpan, cover with milk, add a little sugar, set it again on the fire,
and take off at the first boiling; pour a little of it on _croutons_ in
the soup-dish, and keep covered in a warm place for ten minutes; then
pour also the remainder in, and serve.

_Another._--Prepare as above, throw the pieces in boiling water with a
little salt for five minutes, mash and drain; put butter in a stewpan,
set it on the fire; when melted put the pumpkin in, stir about five
minutes; have ready in your soup-dish some slices of bread fried in
butter, and dusted with sugar, pour on them some boiling milk, keep
covered in a warm place two or three minutes; then turn the pumpkin on,
at the same time mixing the whole gently, and serve.

_With Squash._--It is made as with pumpkin.

_With Asparagus._--Proceed as for green peas.

_With Jerusalem Artichokes._--It is made like that of potatoes.

_With Carrots._--When made with young carrots, it is called potage
_puree Crecy_, or _a la Crecy_. Add broth to taste to a _puree_ of
carrots, turn into the soup-dish over _croutons_, and serve.

_With colored Beans._--When made with colored beans, it is called _a la
Conde_. Proceed as with beans.

The Prince of Conde devised this potage, and besides cooking the beans
in broth, he used to put in one or two partridges also, to give, as he
used to say, "a good taste to the beans."

_With Cauliflowers._--Make a _puree_ of cauliflowers, to which you add
broth to taste, and serve with _croutons_.

_With Chestnuts._--Add broth and _croutons_ to a _puree_ of chestnuts,
and serve warm.

_With Turnips._--It is made as with carrots.

_With Wheat._--Cut ears of wheat when full, but not ripe, and put them
away to dry. Shell the wheat; wash it in cold water, put it in a
saucepan, cover it with broth and boil gently till done. Mash through a
colander, put back on the fire with a little butter; add broth if too
thick, stir now and then for about fifteen minutes; take from the fire,
add two or three yolks of eggs beaten with a little cream and a pinch of
sugar; mix them well with the rest, and serve warm.

_With Sweet Corn._--Proceed as with wheat in every particular. It makes
a healthy and excellent potage.

Water may be used instead of broth, but it is not as nutritive.

_With Swallows' Nests, or Chinese Soup._--The nests are made a
mucilaginous substance of, and built by the species of swallows called
_Hirundo esculenta_; it would require several pages to describe them,
together with their compound material, and would be out of place in a
receipt book. Suffice it to say, that they sell for $100 a pound in
London and Paris (gold of course), and the cheapest potage for one
person costs about three dollars.

Soak about four ounces of it in cold water for ten hours, drain and
clean. Put it in a saucepan, cover well with chicken-broth, place the
saucepan in boiling water for about two hours, add salt to taste, and
then drain again. Place the nests in the soup-dish, pour boiling
_consomme_ over them, and serve warm.

The Chinese are said to use very rich _consomme_ of chicken to prepare
them.

_With Tomatoes and Rice._--Blanch half a dozen tomatoes, and skin them.
Put them in a saucepan with a quart of broth, season with an onion
sliced, three or four sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, half a dozen
pepper-corns, a bay-leaf, two cloves, two cloves of garlic; salt and
pepper. Boil gently till reduced to about two-thirds, then mash gently
through a colander. It is understood by mashing gently, to mash so that
all the liquid part shall pass through the colander, and the seeds and
spices shall be retained in it and thrown away.

While the tomatoes are on the fire boiling, set four ounces of rice on
the fire with cold water and salt, and boil it till tender. Drain the
rice, put it in a saucepan with the tomato-juice after being mashed, set
the saucepan on the fire, add one ounce of butter, a teaspoonful of
sugar, both according to taste; to make the potage thin or thick, boil
gently fifteen minutes, turn into the soup-dish, and serve warm.

The same may be done with canned tomatoes; in that case, set a can of
tomatoes on the fire with the same seasonings, and proceed exactly as
for the above in every other particular.

_The same with Croutons._--Fry some _croutons_ with a little butter, put
them in the soup-dish; turn the potage, or rather the same mixture as
above, over them; cover the soup-dish for two or three minutes, and
serve.

_With Tomatoes and Croutons only._--Fry the _croutons_ and put them in
the soup-dish; turn the tomatoes only over them, after being prepared as
above; cover the soup-dish for two or three minutes, and serve.

_Puree a la Reine._--Procure a rather old chicken and cut it in pieces
as for fricassee; set it on the fire in a saucepan with about a quart of
cold water, salt, and boil gently about one hour. Then add about four
ounces of rice, washed in cold water, continue boiling until the chicken
is overdone and tender. Take the pieces of chicken from the pan, scrape
the flesh off the bones; cut the white flesh (the flesh that is on both
sides of the breast-bone) in dice, and put it in the soup-dish; chop
fine all the other flesh, and then mash it through a sieve or strainer,
together with the rice. If it be rather too thick to mash through,
moisten it with broth. A large iron spoon is the best utensil to mash
through with. Then set the rice and flesh back on the fire in a saucepan
with broth to taste, stir and add immediately from two to four ounces of
butter, a gill of cream, or, if not handy, a gill of milk. Keep stirring
on a slow fire for five or six minutes; salt to taste, turn into the
soup-dish, and serve.

There is no danger of curdling if kept on a slow fire and not allowed to
boil.

_The same with Broth._--To make the potage richer, cook the chicken and
rice in broth instead of water, and proceed as above for the rest.

_The same with consomme._--The chicken and rice may also be cooked in
_consomme_, and when mashed through the sieve, add _consomme_ also
instead of broth, and you have an exceedingly rich soup. This is
excellent for persons having throat diseases; it is easily swallowed,
and very nutritious.

_The same a la Francaise._--The potage _puree a la francaise_ is the
same as that a la reine, with the addition of _quenelles_ of chicken.

_The same a la Princesse._--Add to that _a la reine_, the white flesh of
a roasted chicken, cut in dice, and put in the soup-dish.

Puree of Game.--Proceed as for potage _puree a la reine_, with the
exception that you use prairie-hen, instead of chicken.


  SOUPS.

_Maigre, or Vegetable Soup._--Proceed as for _julienne_ in every
particular, except that water is used instead of broth. Four ounces of
butter may be used instead or two.

_Beef and Mutton Soup._--Take three pounds of beef and two pounds of
breast of mutton; put both pieces in a crockery kettle with four quarts
of cold water, salt, and pepper, set on a slow fire; skim carefully,
then add half a carrot, two turnips, two onions with one clove stuck in
each, two stalks of celery, two leeks, one sprig of parsley, and one
clove of garlic. Simmer four or five hours; dish the meat with carrots,
turnips, and leeks around, to be served after the soup if you choose;
strain the broth, skim the fat off, put back on the fire, give one boil;
have _croutons_ in the soup-dish, pour over them, and serve.

_Mock Turtle._--Put two ounces of butter in a saucepan and set it on the
fire, when melted, add a tablespoonful of flour, stir, and when turning
brown, add three pints of broth (either beef-broth or broth made by
boiling a calf's head, according to taste); boil five minutes then add a
liquor glass of brandy or rum, from one to three glasses of Madeira,
Port, or Sherry wine, about four ounces of calf's-head (the skin only)
cut in dice, mushrooms or truffles, or both, also cut in dice; boil five
minutes. While it is boiling, cut two hard-boiled eggs and half a lemon
in dice and put them in the soup-dish; turn the broth over, and serve.

Made with beef broth it is certainly richer than when made with
calf's-head broth, the latter is gelatinous but less nourishing than the
former.

_Mock Turtle with consomme._--Use _consomme_ instead of broth, and you
have as rich a soup as can be made.

Mock turtle is an English soup, very rich and very good.

_Au Chasseur (Hunter's or Sportsman's Soup)._--A potage _au chasseur_ is
always made with game, such as rabbit, prairie-hen, grouse, venison,
wild turkey, wild pigeon, etc., but never with aquatic birds. It might
be made with quail, but that bird is really too delicate to make soup
with. A whole bird or animal is never used, but the bones and trimmings
only. After having cut off the fleshy parts, the bones are cracked and
used to make the potage.

Take the bones of two prairie-hens after having cut off the flesh on
both sides of the breast-bone, also the legs; cut the bones in pieces
about half an inch long and set them on the fire with half an ounce of
butter, stir for two or three minutes, cover with broth, or game broth,
and boil gently till well cooked, or about two hours.

Put in another pan, and set it on the fire at the same time as the
above, half a head of cabbage, one carrot, one turnip, and one onion,
all cut fine; about half a pound of lean salt pork; cover with cold
water, and boil gently for about two hours also.

In case the water or broth should boil away, add a little more.

After having boiled both vegetables and bones about two hours, take off
the salt pork from the pan in which the vegetables are, and turn what
you have in the other pan over the vegetables, through a strainer; add
some broth if it is too thick; boil ten minutes, and serve.

Proceed as above with the bones and trimmings of other birds.

_Turtle or Terrapin._--Cut the turtle in dice, throw it in boiling water
for two or three minutes, and drain; put it in a stewpan with onions and
ham, also cut in dice; season with thyme, parsley, bay-leaf, salt,
pepper, and a wine-glass of Madeira wine or of good brandy; wet with
_Espagnole_ sauce or with _consomme_, set on a good fire, boil about
half an hour. Ten minutes before taking from the fire, chop the eggs of
the turtle, after having boiled them, and put them in a stewpan; if the
turtle has none, chop and use hard-boiled eggs instead. When done, throw
away parsley, thyme, and bay-leaf, turn into bowls, add a little chopped
chervil, and a quarter of a rind of lemon, also chopped; the latter is
enough for six persons. Serve warm.

It may be strained before putting it in bowls, according to taste.

Turtle-steaks are prepared like beef-steaks.

_With Rice and Milk._--Wash half a pound of rice in cold water. Set it
on the fire with about one pint of milk, boil gently till done, filling
with more milk, so as to keep the rice always covered. When cooked, add
a little butter, milk according to taste, sugar or salt, or both, and
serve. It will not take more than two quarts of milk.

The French name for the above is _riz au lait_.

_With Okra._--Okra or gumbo is little known here; yet it is good in
pickles, used like cucumbers. It is much used for soup in the Southern
States and in the West Indies.

When green and tender, cut it very fine, cook it in broth, add a few
tomatoes or tomato-sauce, according to taste; season with salt, pepper,
and a pinch of sugar. When the tomatoes are cooked, serve warm.

If dry, make a potage like that of tapioca, to which you add a little
tomato-sauce and pepper.

_With Onions._--Put two ounces of butter in a saucepan, and when melted
add a tablespoonful of flour, stir, and when turning rather yellow add
also four or five onions sliced, stir till fried, when you add broth to
taste (about one quart); boil gently about fifteen minutes; mash through
a colander, put back on the fire; give one boil, salt and pepper to
taste; turn into the soup-dish, in which you have some _croutons_, and
serve.

More or less onions may be used, according to taste.

_Ox-Tail._--Chop the ox-tail in pieces about one inch long, set them on
the fire, with about one ounce of butter, stir till it turns rather
brown, and turn the fat off. Then add broth to taste, boil slowly till
the pieces of tail are well done; add salt, pepper, and when handy add
also three or four tomatoes whole; boil gently about fifteen minutes
longer, turn into the soup-dish, and serve meat and all.

Some add wine and liquor, the same as to the mock-turtle soup, but this
is according to taste. The soup is excellent served without wine or
liquor.

When no tomatoes are used, it is not necessary to boil fifteen minutes
longer, serve as soon as done.

_Simple._--Use water instead of broth; season with carrot, turnip,
parsley, leek, onions, cloves, salt, and pepper. Serve as the above.

_Ox-cheek._--An ox-cheek soup is made the same as an ox-tail soup. The
broth is made with ox-cheek instead of with other parts of the beef, and
the potage or soup made with the broth. A little wine--Madeira, Port, or
Sherry--is sometimes added, as for mock-turtle.

_Sheep's-tail._--Proceed as for ox-tail in every particular.

_Sheep's-neck._--Made the same as ox-cheek soup.

_Sorrel._--Put two ounces of butter in a saucepan, set it on the fire,
and as soon as melted, put a good handful of sorrel in, stir for about
one minute; then add a pint and a half of water, salt; boil two or three
minutes; add again a little butter, give one boil and turn into the
soup-dish in which you have _croutons_.

As soon as taken from the fire, two, three, or four yolks of eggs,
beaten with a tablespoonful of water, may be added.

Broth may be used instead of water.

_Oyster._--Put one quart of oysters with their liquor in a saucepan,
with one pint of cold water, and set it on a good fire. Take from the
fire at the first boil, and skim off the scum. Take the oysters from the
pan with a skimmer and put them in the soup-dish. By keeping the
soup-dish in a warm but not hot place, the oysters will not harden. Add
to the juice in the saucepan a gill of white wine; give one boil, and
take from the fire. Mix two ounces of butter with two tablespoonfuls of
flour in a bowl; turn the juice and wine into the bowl also, and mix the
whole well; put the mixture back in the saucepan, and set it on the
fire, adding about half a dozen mushrooms, two or three stalks of
parsley, and pepper to taste. Boil two minutes, turn over the oysters
through a strainer, and serve.

The mushrooms may also be turned into the soup-dish.

_Cabbage._--Put in a kettle with two quarts and a half of water a pound
of salted pork, same of breast of mutton; also, if handy, the remains of
a roasted piece; set on a slow fire; skim before it boils, and then boil
for about an hour and a half; strain, to remove the small bones, if any;
put back in the kettle broth and meat, also one middling-sized cabbage,
which you must have previously thrown in boiling water and boiled ten
minutes; add then two carrots, one turnip, two leeks, half a head of
celery, one onion with a clove stuck in it, a little salt and pepper,
and about half a pound of sausage (not smoked); then boil gently about
two hours, strain the broth, pour it on _croutons_ in the soup-dish, and
serve.

The pork, mutton, and sausage, with the cabbage around, may be served
on a dish after the soup at a family dinner, or kept for breakfast the
next day.

_Cauliflower._--Clean and cut in small pieces three middling-sized
cauliflowers. Put in a stewpan two ounces of butter, and set it on a
moderate fire; when hot put the cauliflowers in; stir now and then till
it turns brown, then add a sprig of thyme, same of parsley, a bay-leaf,
one onion with a clove stuck in it, salt, and white pepper; simmer
gently till the whole is well cooked, throw away the onion, clove,
thyme, and bay-leaf; mash well the cauliflowers, strain and put back on
the fire with the broth; give one boil, pour on _croutons_, and serve.

_Cheese._--Put four ounces of butter in a soup-kettle, with an onion
chopped fine; set on a brisk fire, stir now and then till it has a
yellow color, then sprinkle on it half a tablespoonful of flour, keep
stirring till it turns brown; then add two quarts of water, salt, and
pepper; boil about five minutes. Have prepared in the soup-dish the
following: a thin layer of grated cheese, Gruyere or pine-apple cheese;
on it a layer of thin slices of bread, then another of cheese, again
another of bread, etc., three or four of each; strain, and pour the
liquor in the kettle on the whole; keep in a warm place five minutes,
and serve.

_Milk._--Put a quart of milk in a tin saucepan and set it on the fire;
when it begins to rise, sweeten it to taste; give one boil, pour on
toasted bread, or on _croutons_, or on two ounces of boiled rice, and
serve.

Yolks of eggs may be stirred in, just before turning the milk into the
soup-dish, and when taken from the fire.

_Maigre_ (called _Soup aux Herbes_, _Herb-Broth_, etc.).--Wash, drain,
and chop fine a handful of sorrel, a dozen sprigs of chervil, and half a
head of lettuce; put an ounce of butter in a stewpan, set it on a good
fire; when melted, put the sorrel, chervil, and lettuce in, add salt
and pepper, stir till the whole is cooked; then cover with lukewarm
water; boil three minutes, beat well three yolks of eggs with a
tablespoonful of water, take from the fire and put the eggs in while
stirring; pour immediately on _croutons_, and serve.

_With Leeks._--Clean six leeks; cut them in pieces about half an inch
long, then fry them with a little butter till turning rather yellow; add
then about a pint and a half of water, boil gently till the leeks are
perfectly cooked, salt to taste, and it is ready for use.

This broth may be taken warm or cold.

It is a demulcent, and at the same time the most refreshing drink that
can be taken.

_With Clams._--Wash and clean the clams well. Then put them in a
saucepan with half a pint of water (say one quart of clams), set on the
fire, and at the first boil, take off and drain. Put the pan back on the
fire with two ounces of butter in it; when melted, fry a chopped onion
in the butter, add then the liquor drained, a pint of water, salt,
pepper, parsley chopped fine, and the clams; boil two minutes, add also
a little butter, and when melted and mixed, turn over some _croutons_ in
the soup-dish, and serve warm.

_With Muscles._--Proceed as for clams in every particular.

_Allemande, or German Soup._--Soak four ounces of pearl-barley in tepid
water for eight or ten hours, and strain. Put it in a saucepan with one
quart of broth, a piece of leek, one of celery, and boil gently about
one hour and a half. While it is boiling, mix well together in a bowl
one tablespoonful of flour and half a gill of broth, which turn into the
saucepan, also grated nutmeg and sugar to taste; boil ten minutes
longer, and serve.

_Another, called a la Maria Theresa._--Proceed as for the above, except
that you mix in a bowl six yolks of eggs with half a gill of broth, and
no flour; and finish as in the preceding.

_Another way._--Instead of using pearl-barley, use flour that you have
dried in a bakepan till it turns yellow.

_Indian, or Curry._--Put in a saucepan one ounce of butter and set it on
the fire; when melted, fry in it two large onions, one carrot, and half
a turnip, all sliced; also one leek, a stalk of celery, and four of
parsley, all cut fine. When the whole is fried, cover with about one
quart of broth, season with two cloves, a bay-leaf, half a teaspoonful
of cayenne pepper, same of pimento, two stalks of thyme; boil gently
about one hour and a quarter, and drain. Put the liquor back in the
saucepan and add four ounces of boiled rice, a little saffron to color,
simmer about fifteen minutes longer, and serve.

This soup is good and healthy for southern countries, but is too highly
spiced for this climate.

_Polish, or Barscz._--Peel and clean fifteen or twenty red beets, split
them in two or four lengthwise, and put them in an earthen vessel with a
pail of water and about a pound of rye bread; cover the vessel as
air-tight as possible, and set it in a warm place (about 80 degrees
Fahr.) for about eight days. After that time the liquor is rather sour,
then drain.

Put in a saucepan four pounds of lean beef, one pound of smoked pork,
half a pound of ham, four onions, two leeks, and about four quarts of
the liquor made as above. Simmer till the whole is done; skim off the
scum that may gather on the surface, and then strain.

Roast till half done, three chickens, or one chicken and one rabbit, or
one chicken and one duck; put them on the fire in a saucepan with the
liquor strained from the beef, pork, etc., as described above. Boil
gently about half an hour, strain the liquor again. Then cut the beef,
smoked pork, and ham, in small dice, put the whole in the soup-dish,
with the strained liquor, and serve warm, as soup.

The chicken, or chicken and rabbit, or chicken and duck, are generally
served separately, with some of the beets used to make the liquor, and
with the addition of mushrooms, parsley, celery, onions, and sausages,
raw or cooked, according to taste; and salt, pepper, and spices,
according to taste also.

The poorer classes make this soup with water instead of beet-juice, and
very often with mutton instead of beef; but proceed as described above
in every other particular.

_Russian, or Uka._--The _uka_ is made in Russia with sterlets. It may be
made here with the sturgeon of the lakes, or with salmon or trout.

Cut the fish in pieces about two inches long, and put them in salt water
for one hour, and drain. Cut in small pieces two roots of parsley and
two of celery, throw them into boiling water five minutes and drain
them. Then fry them with a little butter till they turn yellow, when add
a gill of broth, and boil gently till it becomes rather thick. Put the
pieces of fish in also, add salt and pepper, to taste, cover the whole
with fish-broth, boil gently till the fish is cooked, and serve warm.

Some _caviare_ may be added just before serving.

_Another, or Tstchy._--Put four pounds of beef in a soup-kettle (the
poorer classes always use mutton), with a chicken or a duck, half a
pound of smoked pork, same of smoked sausages, four carrots, four
cloves, twelve pepper-corns, salt, two leeks, two onions, four stalks of
parsley, and one of celery; cover the whole with fish-broth, and set on
a good fire. Skim off the scum carefully, and boil gently till the whole
is done. As soon as either the chicken or duck, etc., is done, take it
from the kettle. When the whole is cooked, drain.

Put the liquor back in the kettle with a middling-sized head of cabbage
cut in four, or about the same quantity of sour-krout, slices of carrots
and onions, pearl-barley, _semoule_, or gruel; simmer about three hours,
and it is done.

It is served in two ways: first, all the meat and vegetables are cut in
small pieces and served with the broth as soup; second, the broth is
served with the vegetables cut up, and the meat is served after and
separately, as a _releve_.

Nothing is thrown away but the pepper-corns and cloves.

_Spanish, or Olla Podrida._--Put four ounces of lean and fat salt pork
into a saucepan and set it on a good fire; when partly fried, add half a
pound of beef, same of mutton, same of veal (occasionally a chicken or
partridge is added also), and four ounces of ham. Just cover the whole
with cold water, and skim carefully as soon as the scum comes on the
surface. When skimmed, add a gill of dry peas, previously soaked in
water for an hour, half a small head of cabbage, pimento to taste, one
carrot, one turnip, two leeks, three or four stalks of celery, same of
parsley, two of thyme, two cloves, two onions, two cloves of garlic, ten
pepper-corns, and some mace; fill up with water so that the whole is
just covered, and simmer for about five hours.

In case the water should simmer away too much, add a little more.

When done, dish the pork, beef, mutton, veal, ham, and chicken. Put the
peas, cabbage, carrots, turnips, leeks, celery, and onions on another
dish.

Strain the liquor, pour it on _croutons_ in the soup-dish, and serve the
three dishes at the same time.

The Spanish peasantry and the lower classes in cities, serve the whole
in the same dish, and generally omit the beef and veal. The better class
serve the soup first, and then the meat and vegetables afterward.

_Another._--Chop very fine two onions, one cucumber peeled and seeded, a
little pimento, two cloves of garlic, four sprigs of parsley, same of
chervil, and mix the whole in a bowl with the juice of four tomatoes,
and to which add two or three tablespoonfuls of bread-crumbs. Then
season with oil, vinegar, salt, pepper, mustard, and water to taste, and
serve.

The Spanish call it a cool and refreshing soup.




  SAUCES.


There is no good cooking possible without good sauces. Many excellent
pieces of meat, etc., are spoiled by being served with a poor sauce.

Let every one bear in mind that water is no substitute for broth; that
vinegar or water is no substitute for wine, etc.

There is no place where the old proverb can be better applied than in
the kitchen, "Waste not, spare not."

The _French_, _Italians_, _Spaniards_, and _Germans_, use broth and wine
in their cooking, and do not spend as much as the _Americans_ for their
food; they could not afford it; but they waste not, neither do they lose
any thing good through carelessness or prejudice.

Good sauces are not as difficult to make as is generally believed.

This general belief comes from the fact that many, after having partaken
of a certain dish somewhere, and liking it much, ask of their own cook
to prepare the same.

The cook, most probably, has never heard of it, but nevertheless
prepares a dish which is hardly eatable, and is to the other what a
crab-apple is to a raspberry.

The most important thing in making a sauce is for the cook to put his or
her whole attention and care to it.

Most sauces must be stirred continually while on the fire, and
especially white sauces, such as _Bechamel_, _Bechamel_ with cream or
cream sauce, and white sauce.

It is necessary to stir all sauces now and then, to prevent the forming
of a kind of skin on the surface.

The onions, shallots, garlics, and vinegar, used in sharp sauces, may be
prepared as described for _piquante_ sauce.

Sauces can always be made to suit the taste. A thousand can be made as
well as a hundred, by merely adding or subtracting one or more of the
compounds, or by proceeding differently. An idea of what can be done in
that line can be formed by reading our directions for Supreme Sauce.


  HOW TO MAKE A SAUCE THICKER WHEN IT IS TOO THIN, AND THINNER WHEN TOO
    THICK.

Take two fresh eggs, break them gently, and separate the white part from
the yolk; be careful to have the yolk free from any white (there is in
every yolk a little white spot, which you cannot detach without using a
fork, knife, or spoon); mix well the two yolks with two or three
tablespoonfuls of the sauce that is too thin, and a piece of butter the
size of a pigeon's egg; then take the sauce from the fire, pour the
mixture in it, little by little, stirring all the time; when the whole
is in, put back on the fire for three or four minutes, but do not allow
it to boil; take away and use. When too thick, add broth.

_Allemande._--Chop fine and fry in butter four or five mushrooms; then
add a little flour, and four or five tablespoonfuls of broth; reduce it
to a sauce; put a piece of butter the size of an egg in it, also a sprig
of white parsley chopped fine, one of thyme, a clove, a bay-leaf, a
clove of garlic, a little nutmeg grated fine, the juice of a quarter of
a lemon, and three well-beaten yolks of eggs, boil two or three minutes,
and use. If found too thick, add a little broth.

_Anchovy Butter._--Strain essence of anchovy through a fine sieve, and
knead it with fresh butter, or salt butter that you have kneaded in cold
water previously, and it is ready for use.

_Anchovy Sauce._--Use butter without salt; if salty, work it in cold
water. Set three ounces of butter in a saucepan on the fire, and melt it
slowly; then add about two teaspoonfuls of essence of anchovy; stir a
few seconds, and it is done. More anchovy may be used if liked. It is
served in a boat.

_Apple._--Peel, quarter, and core four or six apples, and set them on
the fire in a small saucepan, with two tablespoonfuls of water; stir now
and then till done; when done, mash through a fine colander; add a
little sugar, and it is ready for use.

If found too thin, keep on the fire for some time. If too thick, add a
little water.

_Cranberry._--Put a quart of cranberries in a saucepan and set it on a
rather slow fire; stir occasionally till done; mash gently through a
fine colander, or through a strainer; add a little sugar, and use.

_Currant._--Proceed as for a cranberry-sauce in every particular, except
that it must be mashed through a strainer or through a towel.

_Peach._--Stone about a quart of peaches, and proceed as for apple-sauce
for the rest.

_Raspberry._--Made the same as currant-sauce.

The five sauces above are served with roasted game.

_Bechamel._--Mix cold, and well together, in a tin saucepan, two ounces
of butter and a tablespoonful of flour; then add a pint of milk, and
set on the fire; stir continually, and when turning rather thick, take
off; beat a yolk of egg in a cup with a teaspoonful of water; turn it
into the sauce, and mix well again; salt and white pepper to taste, and
it is ready for use.

_Blonde._--Proceed exactly as for white sauce, using broth instead of
water.

_Bread._--Take the soft part of half a ten-cent loaf of bread; break it
in pieces, which put in a saucepan with a quart of good fresh milk, six
pepper-corns chopped fine, and a little salt; set on the fire and boil
five or six minutes, stirring the while; take off, mash through a
strainer or a sieve, and it is ready for use.

A bread-sauce is really a very poor sauce. Its insipidity is concealed
by the great amount of pepper that it contains.

_Brown Butter, or Beurre Noir._--This is butter set on the fire in a
frying-pan and left till it turns perfectly brown, then a few sprigs of
parsley are dropped in it, fried half a minute, and it is ready for use.

It is sometimes used with vinegar, but in that case it is described in
the receipts.

_Caper._--Mix well together, cold, in a small saucepan, two ounces of
butter and a tablespoonful of flour; then add a pint of broth, set on
the fire, stir, and when thickening, add capers to taste, whole or
chopped; give another boil, take from the fire, add salt, the yolk of an
egg beaten with a teaspoonful of water, mix and serve.

_Celery._--Proceed as for a caper-sauce in every particular except that
you add three or four stalks of celery chopped fine, and then boil ten
or twelve minutes, and strain it before using.

_Colbert._--Set half a pint of meat gravy on the fire, in a small
saucepan with half a dozen mushrooms and one or two truffles chopped
fine (the latter, if handy), boil gently five minutes, add one ounce of
butter, stir, and when the butter is melted and mixed with the rest, it
is ready for use.

_Coulis of Fish_, _or Fish Gravy_, is one and the same thing.

Boil hard four eggs, and put the yolks in a mortar. Take a pike weighing
about two pounds, clean, prepare, and broil it as directed; split it
open, take all the bones and skin off, put the flesh in the mortar with
the yolks, and pound the whole, and knead it with a little butter. Place
a little butter, of the size of a walnut, in a stewpan, and set it on a
good fire; when melted, fry in it till of a golden color, two carrots
and two onions cut in slices; after that add also a piece of bay-leaf,
two sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, a little isinglass, the eggs and
fish, and cover with water; simmer gently about one hour and a half, and
strain.

If found too thin after it is strained, set it back on the fire, add a
little more isinglass, and simmer fifteen minutes longer.

_Coulis of Veal._--Place in a stewpan about one pound of veal, fillet or
knuckle, with four ounces of bacon, not smoked, and cut fine; also a
carrot cut fine, a little pepper, and grated nutmeg; set on a slow fire,
cover well; half an hour after augment the fire, and as soon as you see
the meat sticking to the pan, subdue it, leave it so ten minutes, then
take from the fire, put the bacon, veal, and carrot on a dish; put
butter about the size of an egg in the pan; when melted, sprinkle in it
a teaspoonful of flour, stir with a wooden spoon, then put the meat back
into it. Cover with warm broth and set on a slow fire for about two
hours; take off, throw in it a few drops of cold water, skim off the
fat, strain, and use.

_Cream._--A cream-sauce is a _Bechamel_ made with cream instead of milk.

It is often called _a la creme_, its French name.

_Cucumber._--Proceed as for caper-sauce, using pickled cucumbers,
chopped fine, instead of capers.

_Egg._--Proceed as for caper-sauce in every particular, except that you
use two hard-boiled eggs, chopped fine, instead of capers.

_Diplomat._--Make a cream-sauce with one pint of cream. When made, put
in it nearly half a pound of lobster butter, stir, and when the whole is
well mixed, add also about a tablespoonful of essence of anchovy and mix
again; pepper to taste, and use.

It is a rich sauce, used with boiled fish and baked or roasted meat.

_Espagnole._--This sauce is very seldom made in the kitchen of a family,
except of a large and wealthy family, being a rather expensive one. In
the kitchen of a family, gravy or even broth is used in its stead; but,
when preparing an extra dinner, it should be made, and a little of it
used in all the brown sauces, either for meat, fish, or vegetables.

Spread about half a pound of butter in the bottom of a stewpan, lay in
it lean ham and veal, partridge, wild rabbit, pheasant, or fowl of any
kind, about four ounces of each, a small carrot cut in dice, one onion
with a clove stuck in it, half a turnip, and a sprig of thyme; cover the
pan and set it on the fire; let it simmer till reduced to a jelly, then
mix in it two tablespoonfuls of flour, a wine-glass of white wine, cover
with broth, add salt, pepper, a clove of garlic, a sprig of parsley, one
clove, a bay-leaf, and two mushrooms cut in pieces; simmer from three
to four hours, skim off the scum as soon as it comes on the surface;
when done, take it from the fire, throw a few drops of cold water in,
and skim off the fat, then strain and use.

It will keep for some time if kept air-tight in a pot or bottle, and in
a cool, dry place.

_Essence of Spinage, or Spinach._--Soak in water, drain, dry, and pound
well two or three handfuls of spinach, put them in a coarse towel and
press the juice out, put it in a pan on a moderate fire, and when nearly
boiling, take it off, strain, and add to it a little fine-crushed sugar,
stir a little, and bottle when cold; it may be kept for months; use it
where directed.

_Sauce for every kind of Fish, boiled, baked, or roasted_.--Boil hard
two eggs, take the yolks and pound them well, and place them in a bowl.
Have boiling water on the fire, and put in it cives, burnet, chervil,
tarragon, and parsley, four or five sprigs of each; boil five minutes,
take off, drain and pound them well, then strain them on the eggs, add
two tablespoonfuls of cider vinegar, two of French mustard, salt,
pepper, and four tablespoonfuls of sweet-oil, which you pour in, little
by little, at the same time mixing the whole well with a boxwood spoon,
and it is ready for use.

_Fines Herbes._--Chop very fine a small handful of parsley, shallots,
and chives; and proceed as for making a caper-sauce, except that you use
the chopped spices instead of capers.

_Genoise._--Put two ounces of butter in a small saucepan, set it on the
fire, and when melted, mix in it a tablespoonful of flour; stir for one
minute, add one-fourth of a carrot, sliced, stir now and then, and when
nearly fried, add also a pint of broth, half a pint of claret wine, a
small onion, and a clove of garlic, chopped; two cloves, a bay-leaf, two
stalks of parsley, one of thyme, salt, and pepper; boil gently about one
hour and forty minutes, and strain. If it boils away, add a little
broth. Put it back on the fire with about half an ounce of butter, boil
gently for about ten minutes, and it is ready for use.

This sauce is excellent with any kind of boiled fish, but especially
with trout, pike, and pickerel.

A trout served with a _genoise_ sauce is considered a _recherche_ dish.

_Hollandaise._--Set one ounce of butter on the fire in a saucepan, and
when melted, add half a tablespoonful of flour, stir, and when turning
rather yellow, add half a pint of broth, stir for one minute; add also
four sprigs of parsley and four mushrooms chopped fine (one truffle
sliced, if handy, would be excellent), a liquor-glass of Madeira, Port,
or Sherry wine; boil gently ten minutes, stirring the while, and serve.

_Indian._--This sauce may be used with fish, in summer and in southern
places.

Have a stewpan on a moderate fire, with two ounces of butter in it; when
melted, add a teaspoonful of pimento, salt, a pinch of saffron, and one
of grated nutmeg, also one and a half tablespoonfuls of flour--the
latter you sprinkle in, little by little, stirring the while; cover with
broth, boil twelve minutes and strain; afterward add two ounces of
butter, stir a little, and use.

_Italian._--Tie together two sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, and a
bay-leaf; put them in a stewpan with two or three mushrooms cut fine,
one shallot, a small onion with a clove stuck in it, a piece of butter
the size of a walnut, and half a pint of white wine; set on a gentle
fire, and reduce it half; then add about one tablespoonful of olive-oil
and half a pint of broth, simmer forty minutes, strain, and use.

_Lobster._--Chop very fine or pound some of the flesh of a boiled
lobster. Take a white or blonde sauce, and instead of taking it from the
fire when done, turn the chopped flesh into it with a little piece of
butter; stir, give one boil, and it is ready for use.

_Craw-fish, prawn, shrimp,_ and _crab_ sauces are made the same as
_lobster_ sauce.

_Madeira._--Mix cold in a saucepan two ounces of butter with a
tablespoonful of flour, set on the fire and stir till it turns rather
brown; when add nearly a pint of gravy, stir till it is becoming thick;
then add half a pint of Madeira wine, little by little, stirring the
while, give one boil only, salt to taste, and then strain and use.

_Champagne_ sauce is made in the same way, except that it must be poured
in faster and used immediately.

All wine sauces may be made in the same way. We mean wine sauces for
meat or fish.

_Maitre d'Hotel._--This sauce is sometimes called _butter_ _maitre
d'hotel_. Mix and knead well together in a bowl, two ounces of butter, a
tablespoonful of chopped parsley and the juice of a half lemon; salt to
taste and use.

Pepper, grated nutmeg, and chopped chives, may be added if liked. Using
vinegar instead of lemon-juice makes an inferior sauce.

_Mayonnaise._--In warm weather it is necessary to put the bowl on ice
while making it. Put one or two yolks of fresh eggs in a bowl with a
small pinch of salt; commence stirring with a box-wood spoon, or, what
is still better, a stone or marble pestle. Stir without interruption,
always in the same way and describing a circle. It is more easily done
if the bowl is held steady. After having stirred about half a minute,
commence pouring the oil in, drop by drop, and as soon as you see that
it is thickening pretty well, add also a few drops of vinegar and same
of lemon-juice; then continue with the oil in the same way. Every time
that it becomes too thick, add a little vinegar, but continue stirring.
You put as much oil as you please; two bottles of oil might be used and
it would still be thick. Spread it on chicken salad, etc.

_Tartar._--Chop some capers and shallots very fine, mix them well with a
_mayonnaise_ when made, and you have a Tartar sauce.

_Mushroom._--Proceed exactly as for caper-sauce, using chopped mushrooms
instead of capers.

_Piquante._--Take a small saucepan and set it on the fire with two
ounces of butter in it, and when melted add a small onion chopped; stir,
and when nearly fried add a tablespoonful of flour, stir, and when
turning rather brown, add half a pint of broth, salt, pepper, a pickled
cucumber chopped, four stalks of parsley, also chopped, and mustard;
boil gently about ten minutes, add a teaspoonful of vinegar; give one
boil, and serve.

_Another way._--Set the chopped onion on the fire with one gill of
vinegar, and boil gently till the vinegar is entirely absorbed, or
boiled away. Make the same sauce as above in another pan, omitting the
onion and vinegar, and when done mix the two together, and it is ready
for use.

_Another._--Add three shallots, chopped fine, to the chopped onion, and
proceed as above for the rest.

_Parisienne._--Make a bunch of seasonings with six sprigs of parsley,
one of thyme, a bay-leaf, and two cloves; put it in a saucepan with half
a pint of chopped truffles, and about a pint of white wine; set on the
fire and boil gently till about half reduced, strain, put back on the
fire, turn into it, little by little, stirring the while, nearly a pint
of gravy or _consomme_; continue stirring now and then till it begins to
turn rather thick, add pepper to taste, strain, and use with fish and
game.

_Poivrade._--Put a piece of butter the size of an egg in a stewpan, and
set it on the fire; when melted, sprinkle in it, little by little, about
a tablespoonful of flour, stirring the while; when of a proper
thickness, and of a brownish color, take from the fire, add a
tablespoonful of vinegar, a wine-glass of claret wine, a glass of broth,
a shallot cut in two, a middling-sized onion, also cut in two, with a
clove stuck in each piece, a sprig of thyme, one of parsley, a bay-leaf,
a clove of garlic, a little salt, and two pepper-corns; boil about
twenty minutes, strain and use.

The vinegar, shallot, and onion may be boiled separately as for a
_piquante_ sauce.

_Polonaise._--Put four ounces of butter in a saucepan on the fire, and
when melted add two or three tablespoonfuls of the soft part of bread,
bruised in a coarse towel; stir for about one minute, salt to taste, and
use.

Like the _Parisienne_, it is used with game.

_Poulette._--Set a stewpan on the fire with a piece of butter the size
of an egg in it; when melted, sprinkle in it a tablespoonful of flour,
stirring the while; pour gently in it also, and little by little, a
glass of warm water, and a wine-glass of white wine, or broth instead of
both, salt, pepper, a sprig of parsley, one of thyme, a bay-leaf, a
chopped shallot, a little nutmeg, four small white onions, and two or
three mushrooms (the latter cut fine and fried in butter before using
them); simmer till the whole is well cooked, strain and use.

In case it should be found too light, add when done, and before taking
from the fire, two or three yolks of eggs, and the juice of a lemon.

_Princesse._--Make a cream-sauce with one pint of cream and set it on a
moderate fire; immediately turn into it, stirring the while, about half
a pint of reduced, good meat gravy; when thoroughly mixed, add two or
three ounces of butter, stir for a couple of minutes longer, strain and
use immediately.

It is a very rich sauce, used with boiled fish and roasted or baked
meat.

_Provencale._--Chop fine two or three mushrooms, and two shallots; put
the whole in a stewpan with a clove of garlic, and two tablespoonfuls of
olive-oil; set on a moderate fire, and leave till half fried; then
sprinkle in it half a teaspoonful of flour, stirring the while; add also
half a pint of white wine, and as much broth, and two small onions, two
sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, half a bay-leaf, salt, and pepper;
simmer about half an hour, take from the fire, and a few minutes after
skim off the fat; take out the garlic, onions, parsley, thyme, and
bay-leaf, and it is then ready for immediate use.

_Ravigote._--Chop fine, and in equal proportion, two tablespoonfuls of
chervil, tarragon, and pepper-grass, also, in equal proportion, one
teaspoonful of burnet and table celery; place the whole in a stewpan
with salt and pepper, cover with broth, set on the fire, and boil twenty
minutes; after which take from the fire, and strain. Mix two ounces of
butter with flour enough to make a paste, put it with the sauce on the
fire, add a tablespoonful of cider vinegar; simmer till of a proper
thickness, and use.

_Robert._--Put about four ounces of butter in a stewpan, set it on a
moderate fire; when melted, sprinkle in it about a tablespoonful of
flour, stirring the while; when of a brownish color, add three small
onions chopped fine, salt, and pepper; stir, and leave on the fire till
the whole is turning brown, then add a glass of broth, boil about thirty
minutes, and strain; mix well in a cup one teaspoonful of vinegar, one
of sugar, and one of mustard, which mix again with the sauce, and it is
ready to be used.

_Remolade._--Chop very fine a small handful of chervil, tarragon, and
burnet, in equal proportion, and put them in a saucer or boat; add salt,
pepper, nutmeg grated, and mustard, to taste; also one or two
hard-boiled eggs cut in dice; mix the whole gently and well; then add
the vinegar, and lastly the oil. The two latter ones are put in little
by little, stirring gently the while. Serve as it is.

_Another._--Proceed as for the above, except that you chop fine with the
chervil, etc., some parsley, shallot, and garlic; the five spices in
equal proportion.

When finished, add also a pinch of sugar.

_Roux._--Set a small saucepan on a moderate fire, with two ounces of
butter in it; sprinkle into it, when melted, a tablespoonful of flour;
stir, and when turning brown, use.

_Shallot._--Chop the shallots, and proceed as for caper-sauce, using
them instead of capers.

_Soubise._--Put about half a pint of good meat gravy in a saucepan; set
it on the fire, and when boiling add half a gill of Madeira wine; when
well mixed, add also two or three tablespoonfuls of _puree_ of white
onions, salt, and pepper; boil five minutes, stirring now and then, and
it is made.

A _soubise_ is an excellent sauce for baked or boiled fish, also for
roasted meat.

_Supreme._--This sauce is made in several ways. We will give here the
three principal ones:

1. Make an _Allemande_ sauce; and when done, add to it two ounces of
butter and half a gill of _consomme_; stir and mix, and place on a brisk
fire to start it boiling at once; take it from the fire as soon as it
becomes thick; then add a few drops of lemon-juice, and use.

2. Make a _roux_; add to it about half a pint of chicken gravy; stir or
boil five or six minutes; then add two ounces of butter, the juice of a
lemon, a pinch of parsley chopped fine; give one boil, and use.

3. This is made like No. 2, except that you use an _Allemande_ sauce
instead of a _roux_, and besides the pint of chicken gravy, etc., you
add also half a gill of white wine.

It is used especially with roasted chicken and game.

_Tomato._--If you use fresh tomatoes, blanch them first; if preserved,
use them as they are in the can. Put one pint of tomatoes in a saucepan
with a small onion and a clove of garlic sliced; also two stalks of
parsley, one of thyme, a bay-leaf, one clove, six pepper-corns, and
salt; boil gently till reduced about one-third, when mash gently through
a strainer or sieve; all the tomato-seed and seasonings must remain in
the strainer; put back on the fire, with a little piece of butter; give
one boil, and it is done.

_Truffle._--This sauce is made like a caper-sauce, using chopped or
sliced truffles instead of capers.

_Veloute._--This and gravy is nearly the same thing. It is gravy made as
directed for gravy, with the addition of a dozen mushrooms chopped fine;
and is used for sauces, like gravy, to make sauces richer than with
broth.

_Vinaigrette._--Put salt and pepper in a saucer (and mustard, if it is
to be used with butcher's meat; but with fish, chicken, or birds, it is
really too strong; it neutralizes the delicate flavor of the object),
and pour vinegar over, little by little, beating with a fork at the
same time; then pour the oil, also little by little, and while beating;
a little chopped parsley is also added; and serve with cold meat, fish,
or vegetables.

It is quickly made, is good, and makes an excellent dish for breakfast,
served as we said above.

_White._--Put two ounces of butter in a small saucepan and set it on the
fire, stir a little, and as soon as melted, remove on a rather slow
fire; add a tablespoonful of flour, stir continually till thoroughly
mixed (two or three minutes); then add again about a pint of boiling
water, pouring gently, and stirring the while, take off when it begins
to turn thick; add a yolk of egg beaten with a teaspoonful of cold
water, mix it well with the rest, and it is ready for use; after having
mixed, also salt and white pepper to taste.

_Oyster._--Add to a white sauce some oysters blanched; then stir and mix
with the whole the juice of half a lemon.

_Muscle._--Boil the muscles about one minute and make as oyster-sauce.


  SAUCES FOR PUDDINGS.

_Milk._--Put in a block-tin saucepan four tablespoonfuls of sugar, one
of flour, four yolks of eggs, one pint of milk; essence to flavor, and
mix the whole well; set on a good but not sharp fire, stir continually
till it begins to become rather thick; take off, turn over the pudding,
and serve.

_Madeira._--Set a saucepan on the fire with one ounce of butter in it;
as soon as melted, add half a tablespoonful of flour, stir till it turns
rather yellow, and add also one pint of water, four ounces of sugar, and
a few drops of burnt sugar; boil gently, about twenty-five minutes; add
nearly a gill of Madeira wine, boil again ten minutes, and serve in a
boat.

_Rum._--Proceed as for Madeira-sauce, except you use half a gill of rum
instead of Madeira.

_Brandy._--Proceed as for rum-sauce, using the same proportion of
brandy.




  FARCES AND GARNITURES,

  CALLED ALSO GARNISH AND GARNISHING, USED TO DECORATE OR ORNAMENT DISHES.


_With Bread._--Put in a tureen about a pound of the soft part of bread,
and cover with broth; when it has absorbed the broth, place it in a
stewpan, set it on a slow fire, and leave till it becomes a thick paste;
stir now and then, then mix well with it three yolks of eggs, and it is
ready for use.

_With Cabbage._--Throw into boiling water a little salt and a
middling-sized cabbage; boil it half an hour, take it from the kettle
with a skimmer, throw it in cold water, and drain it, pressing it a
little in the drainer to force the water out; cut off the stump, and
chop the cabbage fine. Have in a stewpan on the fire, three or four
ounces of fresh butter; put the cabbage in when the butter is half
melted, sprinkling on while stirring a teaspoonful of flour; pour on it,
little by little, some broth, stirring the while, and when it has a fine
brownish color, wet with broth enough to boil it; season with salt, a
little grated nutmeg, and four pepper-corns; boil gently till the sauce
is thick enough, take away the pepper-corns, and use.

_With Combs of Chicken._--Soak the combs over night in cold water, and
then clean them well by wiping roughly with a coarse towel, wetted and
salted; wash and drain them; put a dozen of them in a saucepan with two
sweetbreads blanched, cover the whole with broth, and boil till done;
then add salt, pepper, a few drops of lemon-juice, and it is ready for
use.

_With Cauliflowers._--Proceed as for cabbage in every particular, except
that it does not require as long doing.

With _Croutons._--Cut pieces of soft part of stale bread in different
shapes, and fry them on both sides in butter or fat.

For potage, they are cut in dice, but for decorating dishes, they are
cut either round, square, oblong, or of a heart, star-like, half moon,
butterfly, or flower shape, and about one-quarter of an inch thick. Take
them off with a skimmer, and turn into a colander to drain.

[Illustration]

The cut _d_ is used for potage, and _a_, _b_, _c_, etc., are used to
decorate.

_Duxelle._--Make a _fines-herbes_ sauce, and when ready to be used, add
half a gill of gravy, and give one boil; add also two or three yolks of
eggs, simmer one minute, and use warm.

Mushrooms, whole or in slices, may be added at the same time the yolks
of eggs are added.

_With Eggs._--Mash and mix well together six hard-boiled yolks of eggs
with three yolks not cooked, salt and pepper. Put the mixture in parts
on the paste-board, which must be previously dusted with flour; roll
each part and give it the shape of a small egg (a pigeon's egg or a
little larger). When the whole is thus prepared, drop in boiling water,
boil till cooked, and use to decorate meat or fish.

_Financiere._--A garniture _financiere_ is the same as a garniture with
combs of chicken, to which are added some mushrooms and truffles, both
cut in slices.

It is generally served with a roast chicken.

_With Livers._--Geese livers are the best, being the fattest. Drop two
geese livers in boiling water and a little salt, boil three minutes and
drain. Put in a saucepan one gill of broth, same of white wine, Sauterne
or Catawba, a tablespoonful of gravy, six pepper-corns, two or three
stalks of parsley, salt, and the livers; set on the fire and boil gently
for about twenty-five minutes. Take off the livers, boil a few minutes
longer to thicken the sauce, turn it over the livers through a strainer,
and it is ready.

The same may be done with the livers of poultry or any other kind of
birds; the seasonings are the same, and the proportion is according to
the size or to the number of livers.

Besides being used as garnishing, it may be served as a breakfast dish.

_Macedoine._--Blanch a dozen of Brussels cabbages. Blanch also half a
dozen asparagus cut in pieces about an inch long. Put four ounces of
butter in a saucepan on the fire, and when melted put it into a gill of
carrots, same of turnips, both cut with a vegetable spoon, also a dozen
small onions; stir now and then till the whole is about half done, when
add a little over a pint of broth and the Brussels cabbages; boil about
ten minutes. Then add again the blanched asparagus, half a dozen
mushrooms, broth just enough to cover the whole, simmer till every thing
is done, salt and pepper to taste, a pinch of sugar and it is ready for
use.

Water may be used instead of broth, but is inferior.

A _macedoine_ may be served with any meat--roasted, baked, or broiled.

_With Mushrooms._--Chop fine half a pint of fresh mushrooms and two
tablespoonfuls of parsley. Set a saucepan on the fire with two ounces of
fat grated salt pork in it, as much butter, and as soon as the butter is
melted put the mushrooms and parsley in; season with salt, pepper, a
little grated nutmeg, and a quarter of a pint of white wine; let boil
gently till reduced to a jelly, and use.

When done, three or four yolks of eggs may be mixed with it.

_With Onions._--Put a dozen onions in a crockery saucepan and half cover
them with broth. Cover the pan as well as possible, simmer till cooked,
then add a teaspoonful of sugar, salt, simmer again for about ten
minutes, basting now and then, and serve warm with beef, mutton, or
venison.

_Quenelles._--Chop fine one pound of fresh veal, half lean and half
fat--the fat nearest the kidney is the best; then pound it well and mash
it through a sieve. Mix two yolks of eggs with it, and season to taste
with salt, pepper, nutmeg grated, and powdered cinnamon. Spread flour on
the paste-board, put a teaspoonful of meat here and there; roll gently
each part into small balls, using as little flour as possible. They may
also be rolled of an olive shape. Throw the balls into boiling broth or
boiling water at the first boiling, boil five minutes and drain. As soon
as cold they are ready for use.

_Boulettes_, _fricadelles_, _godiveau_, and _quenelles_ are one and the
same thing.

Whole eggs may be used instead of the yolks only, add also a few
bread-crumbs. To the seasonings above some parsley chopped fine may be
added.

Make _quenelles_ with any kind of meat--butcher's meat, poultry, and
game, also with fish well boned.

To the lean meat add the same weight of fat veal, as above directed, or,
in its stead, beef suet.

Truffles or mushrooms, or both, may be added to the mixture, either of
meat or of fish.

_Quenelles_ are used for garnitures, etc. They may be fried instead of
boiled.

_Salpicon._--Cut in dice an equal quantity of each, and to weigh
altogether about one pound and a half, calf sweetbreads, livers, or
flesh of fowls, and ham--three kinds in all; also two mushrooms and two
truffles; all must be nearly cooked in water beforehand. Put them in a
stewpan, season with salt, pepper, a bay-leaf, a clove of garlic, an
onion, a sprig of parsley, and one of thyme; cover with half a pint of
broth, and as much of white wine; set on a slow fire; it must not boil,
but simmer gently; stir now and then till the whole is well cooked; take
out the bay-leaf, onion, garlic, parsley, and thyme. In case the sauce
should not be thick enough, add a little fecula, stir, and leave awhile
longer on the fire, and it is ready for use.

_With Truffles._--Slice the truffles and put them in a saucepan with a
pinch of sugar, broth and claret wine enough to cover them, half of
each, simmer for about twenty minutes, add a little potato starch, boil
gently till it begins to thicken, and use.

_Lobster Butter._--Put the flesh of the two large claws of a boiled
lobster with a little of the inside, about a tablespoonful, in a mortar
and pound well. Add about the same volume of good butter and pound again
till the whole is well mixed. It is then mashed through a fine sieve,
and is ready for use. When the lobster has coral, it is pounded with the
rest, and gives a fine color to the butter.

If the lobster has no coral, a piece of the reddest part of the shell is
pounded with the rest, when the butter is to be colored.

This butter may be used instead of ordinary butter for fish-sauces, or
for making a _maitre d'hotel_ for boiled fish, or for garnishing the
same.

To clarify it, just put the butter into a bowl when made, put the bowl
in a boiling _bain-marie_ for about half an hour, take off and
immediately turn it through a cloth into a bowl half full of cold water.
The cloth must be rather twisted, to cause the butter to run through.
When it is in the bowl, stir it till rather hard; work it in a ball, and
wipe it dry.

Thus clarified it is finer than when used merely mixed.

The same butter may be made, and in the same way, with _craw-fish_,
_prawns_, and _shrimps_.

_Horse-radish Butter._--Grate some horse-radish and mix it well with
about the same volume of butter, mash through a sieve, and it is ready
for use.

_Tarragon_ and _garlic_ butter are made as the above.

If the butter be found too strong, use more butter and less of garlic,
etc.

_Ravigote Butter_ (called also _Beurre de Montpellier_).--Blanch the
following spices: parsley, tarragon, chives, chervil--parsley and
chervil in equal proportion and about half as much of the two others,
about two handfuls altogether--drain dry and put them in a mortar with
two anchovies boned, one shallot chopped and bruised in a coarse towel,
half a dozen capers, a rather small piece of pickled cucumber, four
ounces of butter, two hard-boiled yolks of eggs, and the juice of half a
lemon. Pound the whole well together, then add a tablespoonful of
essence of spinach, mix well, mash through a sieve, and use.

This butter is excellent to decorate and to eat with cold fish. It is
sometimes used with cold birds.

_Hazel-nut Butter._--Pound some hazel-nuts or filberts and then mix
throughly with good butter, mash through a sieve, and use as ordinary
butter. The proportion according to taste. It is easily prepared, and is
delicious.

Do the same with _pea-nuts_, or any other nut.

_Melted Butter._--Put butter in a crockery vessel and place it above a
pan of water or some other liquid, heated but not boiling, so that the
butter will melt slowly and gradually. Sometimes the butter may be
wanted soft only, or what is called melted soft, or thoroughly melted.
It is easy to obtain those different states above with heated liquor,
and the butter, though melted, is more firm than when melted on the
fire.

_Scented Butter._--Whenever a certain flavor is desired with butter, put
a piece of firm and good butter in a bowl with a few drops of essence,
knead well, and then mash through a sieve.


  PUREES.

_Purees_ are made with vegetables, but when the flesh or poultry or
other birds is mashed through a sieve after being cooked, it is
sometimes called a _puree_ also.

The bones of a ham, after the flesh is disposed of, is the most
excellent thing you can put with the vegetables to boil them in order to
make _purees_.

One-third of the bones of a middling-sized ham is enough for about a
quart of vegetables.

When you have no ham bones, use four ounces of good salt pork, as lean
as possible; but never use smoked pork, it gives a disagreeable taste to
the puree.

_Of Dry Beans, white or colored, Kidney, Lima, or any other kind._--Dry
beans must be soaked in cold water, or even in lukewarm water, when in a
hurry. According to the nature of the beans, they must be soaked for
from six to twenty-four hours.

Soak a quart of beans as directed above; drain and put them in a
saucepan with one-third of the bones of a ham, or about four ounces of
salt pork; cover with cold water, season with a bay-leaf, a sprig of
thyme, two of parsley, two middling-sized onions, with two cloves stuck
in them, and a carrot cut in pieces; when the whole is well cooked,
throw away thyme, bay-leaf, onions, and cloves; mash well through a
colander all the rest except the bacon.

While mashing them through the colander, wet them with some of the water
in which they have boiled, else it would be difficult and long.

When mashed, put them in a saucepan with a little broth or water, salt,
and two ounces of butter; stir now and then till the butter is melted
and thoroughly mixed with the rest, and it is ready for use. The
quantity of broth or water is according to how thick or thin they are
wanted. The salt pork is good to eat.

_Of Lentils._--It is made in the same way as that of beans, except that
they do not require to be soaked more than five or six hours in cold
water.

_Of Peas (dry or split)._--Proceed as for lentils in every particular.

_Of Chestnuts._--Remove the skin of a quart of chestnuts and drop them
in boiling water, with a little salt. As soon as the under skin comes
off easily, take them from the fire, drain, drop them in cold water, and
then remove the under or white skin; put them in a saucepan with about
one quart of broth, set on the fire and boil gently till well done, and
mash through a colander.

Then put the chestnuts, and what is left of the broth, in a saucepan,
set on the fire, stir, add a pinch of sugar and an ounce of butter; give
one boil, and it is made.

_Of Green Peas._--Wash a quart of green peas in cold water, and drain;
put two quarts of cold water on the fire in a saucepan, with a little
salt, and at the first boil throw the peas in, season with three or four
sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, two onions, and two cloves, a carrot in
slices, salt, and pepper; boil till tender. It may take only two
minutes, or it may require half an hour, according to how tender the
peas are.

Mash through a colander, and finish like puree of beans, using either
broth or water. With broth it is richer and better.

_Of Lima Beans._--Proceed for green Limas as for green peas.

_Of Sweet Corn._--It is made like that of green peas.

_Of Asparagus._--Cut the eatable part of the asparagus in pieces, and
proceed as for _puree_ of green peas.

_Of Potatoes._--Steam a quart of potatoes, and then mash them well; put
them in a saucepan with half a pint of milk, two ounces of butter, and
salt; set on the fire, stir now and then, take off and use. It takes
about fifteen minutes after being set back on the fire.

_Another way._--Proceed as above, using broth or water instead of milk.

_Of Jerusalem Artichokes._--Prepared as potatoes.

_Of Carrots._--Clean well, and cut in slices, a dozen middling-sized
carrots; put them in a stewpan with four ounces of butter, and set on
the fire; when about half fried, cover with broth or water; season with
half a bay-leaf, a small sprig of thyme, one of parsley, a small onion,
and a clove stuck in it; when the whole is well cooked, throw away
onion, clove, bay-leaf, and thyme, mash the rest through a colander;
then put back on the fire, with a little butter; simmer for about two
hours, stirring occasionally, and it is made.

In case it should turn too thick, add broth or water.

The longer they are simmered, the better the taste.

_Of Turnips._--Proceed as with carrots in every particular.

_Of Celery._--It is always made with turnip-rooted celery. Clean the
celery well, wash and cut it in pieces, and prepare as _puree of
carrots_, adding a teaspoonful of sugar.

_Of Cauliflowers._--Separate the branches, and throw them in boiling
water and salt; boil two minutes and drain. Put them on the fire with
broth or water, enough just to cover them, two or three stalks of
parsley, and salt to season.

Boil gently till tender; remove the parsley; mash through a colander;
put back on the fire with a little butter and white pepper, simmer about
ten minutes, stirring now and then the while, and it is ready for use.

Instead of butter, some cream may be added.

_Of Pumpkin._--Made exactly the same as that of cauliflowers, after the
pumpkin is peeled and cut in pieces.

_Of Squash._--Same as pumpkin.

_Of Spinach._--Clean the spinach, and cut off the stem; the leaf only is
good; wash and drain it; put cold water and a little salt on the fire,
and throw the spinach in at the first boil. When tender, drain and drop
immediately in cold water; drain again, and then chop it very fine.
After being chopped, it may be mashed through a sieve, to have it finer;
put it back on the fire without any water at all, and when it gets
rather dry, add a little flour; stir and mix; add again a little gravy
or good broth; stir, then salt to taste, and it is ready for use.

If the spinach is young and tender, it takes only two or three minutes
boiling before chopping it.

From the time it is put back on the fire, it takes about five or six
minutes to finish it.

_Of Sorrel._--Proceed as with spinach in every particular.

_Of Mushrooms._--Clean well and cut in pieces a quart of fresh
mushrooms; soak them in cold water, in which you have put the juice of a
lemon; drain, and chop them fine. Put a stewpan on the fire, with a
piece of butter the size of a duck's egg; when melted, put your
mushrooms in; when half fried, add the juice of a lemon, finish frying,
then cover with some roux-sauce; let simmer till it becomes rather
thick, strain and use.

_Of Onions._--Peel, quarter, and blanch for eight minutes, a dozen
onions. Drain and put them in a saucepan with four or six ounces of
butter, according to the size of the onions; set on a slow fire, stir
now and then till well done; then season with salt, a little flour, stir
for two minutes to cook the flour, and mix it thoroughly with the rest;
take from the fire; add cream, little by little, stirring the while. It
does not require much cream to make the _puree_ of a proper thickness.
Mash through a sieve or fine colander, add a pinch of sugar, and it is
ready for use.

It makes an excellent _puree_, and is good served with nearly every kind
of meat.

Made with white onions, and properly mashed through a sieve, it looks
like cream, and is almost as white as snow.




  FISH.


The Indians bleed the fish as soon as caught, because the flesh is
firmer when cooked.

The Dutch and the French bleed the cod, which accounts for the better
quality and whiteness of their cod-fish.

_To select._--To be good, fish must be fresh. It is fresh when the eyes
are clear, the fins stiff, the gills red, hard to open, and without bad
odor.

_To clean and prepare for boiling._--The sooner fish is cleaned the
better. Cut the belly open, take the inside out, wash well and wipe dry
immediately with a clean towel, inside and out. Place the eggs or soft
roes inside, and tie with twine. It is then ready to be boiled.

If not cooked as soon as cleaned and prepared, keep it on ice.

_To clean and prepare for baking, frying, roasting, and to cut in
pieces, etc._--Scale the fish well, holding it by the head or tail; cut
the belly open and take the inside out; trim off the fins, gills, and
tail; wash well inside and out, and wipe dry immediately.

Keep it on ice if not used immediately.

_Same Family, or Kind._--We give only one receipt for all the fishes of
the same family, or having the same kind of flesh, as they are cooked
alike, and require the same spices.

Almost every kind of fish is boiled, broiled, fried, or stewed. Some are
better boiled than broiled, others better fried than stewed, etc. With
few exceptions, any eatable fish may be cooked in these four ways. Few
are roasted.

_To know when cooked enough._--It is very difficult, if not entirely
impossible, to tell how long it takes to cook fish, as it depends as
much on the size, kind, or quality of the fish as on the fire; but as
soon as the flesh comes off the bones easily, the fish is cooked; this
is very easy to be ascertained with a knife.

_To improve._--Clean the fish as for baking, etc., and lay it in a
crockery vessel with the following seasonings under and upon it: parsley
and onions chopped fine, salt, pepper, thyme, bay-leaves, and vinegar or
oil; turn it over occasionally, and leave thus for two or three hours.

_To bone._--Slit the fish on one side of the backbone and fins, from
head to tail; then run the knife between the bones and the flesh so as
to detach the whole side from the rest; do the same for the other side.

For a flounder, or any other flat fish, slit right in the middle of both
sides of the fish so as to make four instead of two pieces.

The head, bones, and fins are not used at all, and are left in one
piece.

_To serve, when boiled._--The fish is placed on a napkin and on a dish
or platter, surrounded with parsley, and the sauce served in a saucer.

_To skin._--Take hold of the piece of fish by the smaller end, and with
the thumb and forefinger of the left hand; run the knife between the
flesh and skin, moving the knife to and fro as if you were sawing.
Throw away the skin, and the fish is ready for cooking.

If the skin were breaking, as it happens sometimes, take hold of it
again, and proceed as before.

_To decorate._--Fish may be decorated with jelly, but it is easier and
more sightly with craw-fish. The skewers are stuck in the fish as they
are in a _fillet of beef_.

The craw-fish when boiled are red like the lobster, and, besides using
them with skewers, some may be placed all around the fish; it is
delicate eating as well as sightly. Skewers are never used with fish in
_vinaigrette_, or when the fish is cut in pieces. The craw-fish has only
to be boiled before using it for decorating fish.

_Shrimps_ and _prawns_ are used the same as craw-fish.

_Oysters_ are also used, raw or blanched; run the skewer through a large
oyster or craw-fish, then through a slice of truffle; again through an
oyster, truffle, etc.; through two, three, or more of each, according to
the size of the skewer or of the fish.

[Illustration]

_Fish-kettle._--A fish-kettle must have a double bottom. It is more
handy to take the fish off without breaking it, and there is no danger
of having it spoiled while cooking. Fish-kettles are found in every
house-furnishing store.

_Baked._--Clean and prepare the fish, as directed for baking; put it in
a baking-pan with salt, pepper, and butter spread all over it; just
cover the bottom of the pan with water or broth; place a piece of
buttered paper over it and bake. Baste two or three times; take off when
done, and serve warm with a sauce.

While the fish is baking you prepare the sauce, put it in a boat, and
serve warm with the fish.

A baked fish may be served with its gravy only, adding a few drops of
lemon-juice or vinegar, or with any kind of sauce, according to taste.

_Balls._--Fish-balls are often called _fish-cakes_ or _fish-croquettes_.
They are generally made with cold fish, but it may be cooked especially
to make balls.

Fish, full of bones, like shad, is not fit to make balls; cod is the
easiest.

Commence by chopping the flesh very fine, then chop fine also a small
piece of onion and fry it with butter (half a middling-sized onion with
two ounces of butter are enough for half a pound of fish); when fried
stir in it a tablespoonful of flour, and about half a minute after turn
the fish in with about a gill of broth or water, salt, pepper, and a
pinch of nutmeg; stir till it turns rather thick, which will take two or
three minutes; take from the fire, mix two yolks of eggs with it; put
back on the fire for about one minute, stirring the while; then add two
or three mushrooms or one truffle, or both, chopped fine. Turn the
mixture into a dish, spread it, and put it away to cool for two or three
hours, or over night.

Before cooking, mix the whole well, the upper part being more dry than
that which is under; put it in parts on the paste-board, roll each part
to the shape you wish, either round, oval, or flat; the paste-board must
be dusted with bread-crumbs or flour to help in handling the mixture,
then boil or fry, according to taste.

It may also be baked in cakes.

When fried, they may be dipped in beaten egg, rolled in bread-crumbs,
and then fried in hot fat. (_See_ Frying.)

_Boiled._--Clean and prepare the fish as directed, and put it in a
fish-kettle; cover it with cold water (sea-water is the best); add the
following seasonings to a pound of fish: two stalks of parsley, one of
tarragon if handy, one tablespoonful of vinegar, and half a
middling-sized onion sliced; salt if boiled in fresh water. Set on the
fire, and, for a fish weighing two pounds or under, take off at the
first boiling--it is done enough. For a fish weighing five pounds, boil
five minutes, etc., that is, about one minute for each pound. If it were
a thick slice of fish instead of a whole one, weighing two or three
pounds, it should be boiled two or three minutes longer, etc., according
to thickness.

_Broiled._--Slit the fish on the back and clean it; salt and pepper it;
have a little melted butter and spread it all over the fish, on both
sides, with a brush, and broil it. (_See_ Broiling.)

While the fish is broiling, prepare a _maitre d'hotel_ sauce, spread it
on the fish as soon as dished, and serve.

It may also be served with anchovy butter.

_Fried._--Any small fish of the size of a smelt, or smaller, is better
fried than prepared in any other way.

Clean and prepare the fish as directed, wipe it dry. Dip it in milk,
place in a colander for five minutes, then roll in flour, and fry. It
may also be fried just rolled in flour.

_Another way._--When wiped dry, dip in beaten egg, roll in bread-crumbs,
and fry.

_Another._--When wiped dry, dip the fish in butter, and fry. Then the
fish is dropped in hot fat (_see_ Frying), turned into a colander,
salted, and served hot, with fried parsley around or in the middle,
according to how the fish is arranged in the dish.

Fry the following as above: _carp_, _tench_, _frost_, _bass_, _perch_,
_black and blue fish_, _gold_, _loach_, _mullet_, _porgy_, _weak_,
_flounder_, _pike_, _pickerel_, _smelt_, _sun_, _herring_, and
_white-fish of the lakes_.

_A la Orly._--If it is small fish, like the smelt, it is prepared whole;
if the fish is larger, it must be boned and skinned, and cut in pieces
about two inches long. Roll the fish, or pieces of fish, slightly in
flour; dip it in beaten egg, and roll it again in bread-crumbs; then fry
it in hot fat as above.

When fried, serve it with a tomato-sauce.

The fish may be served on a napkin in a dish, and the sauce in a boat or
saucer.

_Roasted._--The following fishes only are roasted: _eel_, _salmon_,
_shad_, _pike_, _turbot_.

Clean and prepare as directed, and then tie with twine. Spread salt,
pepper, and melted butter (with a brush) all over the fish, and then
envelop it in buttered paper; set on the spit and roast. Baste with a
little melted butter, and remove the paper about five minutes before it
is done.

When on the dish the twine is cut off and removed, and it is served as
hot as possible with the following sauces, to which tarragon is added in
making them, if handy: _caper_, _Hollandaise_, _Mayonnaise_, _piquante_,
_poivrade_, and _remolade_. A roast fish is served after roast meat.

_Another way._--Clean, and cut in slices half an inch thick, or leave
entire, as it suits you; skin it well; lay it in a crockery vessel,
spread over it some chopped parsley, grated nutmeg, salt, pepper, and
two gills of white wine (this is for about three pounds), leave thus
two hours; then take the fish only, envelop it in buttered paper, fix it
on the spit before a good fire, baste with the wine and seasonings from
the crockery dish, and when nearly done take the paper off; finish the
cooking, basting the while, and serve with the drippings, to which you
may add a little vinegar, sweet-oil, and mustard.

If there is any left, you can serve it cold the next day with an
oil-sauce.

_Saute._--Scale, clean, and prepare the fish as directed. For one pound
of fish put about one ounce of butter in a frying-pan on the fire, and
when melted put the fish in; fry it on both sides, and serve it with a
_maitre d'hotel_.

_Stewed._--Clean and prepare as directed three pounds of fish, cut it in
pieces about two inches long. Put in a fish-kettle four ounces of
butter, kneaded with a teaspoonful of flour, and the same of chopped
parsley, add two or three mushrooms cut in pieces, salt and pepper, then
the fish and a glass of claret wine, or a wine-glass of vinegar; cover
with water, set on a good fire, boil gently till cooked; dish the pieces
of fish, strain the sauce on them, spread the pieces of mushrooms over,
and serve.

_Stuffed._--When cleansed, cut out the backbone from the head to within
two inches of the tail, and fill its place with the following mixture:
soak stale bread in cold water and then squeeze the water out; put one
ounce of butter into a saucepan and set it on the fire; as soon as
melted, fry in it one middle-sized onion, chopped fine; then add the
bread; stir for two minutes, add also salt, pepper, a pinch of nutmeg,
two or three tablespoonfuls of broth; stir again two or three minutes;
take the pan from the fire, add a yolk of egg, put back on the fire for
half a minute, stirring the while, take off again, add a teaspoonful of
chopped parsley, and use. When full, tie the fish with twine; place it
in a baking-pan, salt and pepper it; spread a little butter on it also;
cover the bottom of the pan with cold water, bake and serve with its
gravy.

If there is not gravy enough, or if it has dried away, add a little
broth a few minutes before taking from the oven.

_Fish au Gratin._--Bone and skin the fish as directed. For a fish
weighing about two pounds, spread one ounce of butter on a tin plate or
baking-pan, spread over it half an onion, chopped; place the pieces of
fish on them; add salt, pepper, a tablespoonful of vinegar or a
wine-glass of white wine, and half an ounce of butter; spread over and
bake.

While it is baking, put in a small saucepan one ounce of butter, and set
it on the fire; when melted, add half a tablespoonful of flour, stir,
and, when it is turning yellow, add also about one gill of broth, two
tablespoonfuls of meat-gravy, the juice of the fish when baked (if the
fish be not done when the time comes to put the juice in the pan, keep
the pan in a warm place, and wait), salt, and pepper; boil gently about
five minutes, stirring occasionally. Place the fish in a tin or silver
dish, spread three or four mushrooms sliced over it; turn the sauce
gently over the whole, dust with bread-crumbs; put half an ounce of
butter, in four or five pieces, on the whole; bake ten or twelve
minutes, and serve in the dish in which it is.

_In Matelote._--Every kind of fish is good in _matelote_, but the
following are the best: _bass_, _black-fish_, _blue-fish_, _carp_,
_eel_, _perch_, _pickerel_, _pike_, _porgy_, _tench_, _trout_, and
_craw-fish_.

A _matelote_ may be made of eels alone, but it is better with eels and
one, two, or three other kinds of fish.

Eels tasting of mud are not good. There is a sure way of taking away the
muddy taste, but it is a rather expensive one. Boil them a few minutes
in claret wine and a little salt, before using them.

Clean, and prepare as directed, one pound of eels, one pound of pike,
and one pound of trout, or one pound of any of the fishes named
above--in all, three pounds. Cut the fish in pieces about two inches
long, fry it slightly with a little butter, and put it away for awhile.

Put four ounces of butter in a saucepan and set it on the fire; when
melted, add two tablespoonfuls of flour, stir, and, when the flour is
turning rather brown, add also about a quart of broth, a pint of claret,
a bunch of seasonings, composed of half a dozen stalks of parsley, two
of thyme, two bay-leaves, and two cloves, also salt, pepper, two cloves
of garlic, and six button onions; boil gently for about half an hour.
Then put the fish in with from six to twelve mushrooms, broth enough to
cover the whole, if the broth and wine already in do not cover it; boil
gently for about half an hour, or till the fish is cooked, tossing the
saucepan now and then; dish the fish; place the mushrooms and onions all
over; sprinkle the sauce over it through a strainer, and serve warm.
_Croutons_ may be served around.

_Another, or Mariniere._--Prepare and cut the fish as for the above, but
instead of frying it put it in a saucepan, into which you have put
previously about half a dozen sprigs of parsley, two of thyme, two
bay-leaves, two cloves of garlic, twelve small onions, two cloves, salt,
and pepper; when the fish is placed over the above seasonings, cover
entirely with claret wine. Set the saucepan on a sharp fire, and, as
soon as it boils, throw into it a glass of French brandy, set it on
fire, and let it burn. It will not burn very long, but enough to give a
good taste to it. As soon as it stops burning, knead four ounces of
butter with a tablespoonful of flour, and put it in the pan; toss the
pan gently now and then till done. It takes about forty minutes with a
good fire.

When done, dish the fish carefully, place the mushrooms all over it, the
onions all around, strain the sauce over the whole, and serve warm.

_Croutons_ may also be served with the rest; put around the fish one
_crouton_, then an onion, and so on, all around.

_Another._--Proceed as for the above, in every particular, except that
you cover the fish and seasonings with broth and white wine, half of
each, instead of claret. Serve in the same way.

A _matelote_ may be made three or four days in advance, and then warmed
in boiling water (_bain-marie_) just before serving it.

Many prefer a _matelote_ made four days before eating it, and prepared
in the following way: When made, put it away to cool as quickly as
possible; twenty-four hours after that, warm it in boiling water; cool,
and warm again in the same way once a day. If the sauce becomes thick,
add a little broth. Serve warm.

_Vinaigrette_.--Boil a fish as directed, take it from the kettle and let
cool; then dish it. Chop fine the yolks of two hard-boiled eggs; do the
same with the two whites; chop also a handful of parsley. Put a string
of the yolks on both sides of the fish, then along that a string of the
whites, and along these a string of the parsley; along the parsley, and
about half an inch apart, a string of capers. Cut a lemon in sixteen
slices, and in the following way: first split the lemon in two
lengthwise, then split again each half in two and lengthwise also; by
splitting four times, you have sixteen pieces, resembling somewhat the
carpels of oranges. After the first splitting, hold the piece of lemon
with the nail of the left thumb, the rind downward, and always split
lengthwise and in the middle. Place eight pieces on each side of the
dish and along the capers, and serve cold, with stalks of parsley on top
of the fish, and also two or three in its mouth.

Serve with it a vinaigrette, in a saucer or boat.

The following fishes, _bass_, _black and blue fish_, _carp_, _cat_,
_dory_, _drum_, _gar_, _gurnard_, _herring_, _king_, _lump_, _mackerel_,
_parr_, _perch_, _pickerel_, _pike_, _pilot_, _porgy_, _roach_, _rock_,
_scup_, _sucker_, _sword_, _tautog_, _tench_, _trout_, _troutlet_,
_weak_, and _weaver_, after being baked or boiled as directed, may be
served with the following sauces: _anchovy_, _caper_, _genevoise_,
_genoise_, _au gratin_, _Hollandaise_, _Italienne_, _matelote_,
_tomato_, _Tartar_, and _vinaigrette_.

It would be perfectly useless to have a receipt for each fish, since the
preparation is the same.

The same fishes are also prepared _au court bouillon_. Clean and prepare
about three pounds of fish, as directed for baking, etc. It may be one
fish or several, according to size. Place the fish in a fish-kettle,
just cover it with cold water and a gill of vinegar, or with half water
and half white wine; season with three or four sprigs of parsley, one of
thyme, a bay-leaf, one clove, one onion, half a carrot (in slices), two
cloves of garlic, salt, pepper, and a little tarragon, if handy. Set on
the fire, and boil gently till done. Dish the fish, and serve it warm
with a caper or anchovy sauce in a boat, or with currant jelly.

_The same--a la Bretonne._--Slit the fish on the back, as for broiling,
and clean it. When wiped dry, lay it in a bake-pan in which there is a
little melted butter, the inside of the fish under; place thus on a
good fire, turn over when done on one side, and, when cooked, spread
some _maitre d'hotel_ on it, and serve warm.

_The same--aux fines herbes._--Clean and prepare as for baking, etc.,
and also improve it as directed. Envelop the fish in buttered paper, and
also the seasonings in which it has been improved, except the thyme and
bay-leaves, broil it, and serve with _piquante_ sauce.

_Cod-fish_, _cusk_, _haddock_, _hake_, _halibut_, _pollack_, and
_torsk_, after being baked or boiled as directed, are served with the
following sauces:

_Anchovy_, _Bechamel_, _caper_, _cream_, _egg_, _Hollandaise_, _maitre
d'hotel_, _tomato_, _vinaigrette_.


EEL, CONGER, AND LAMPREY.

_To clean._--When skinned, clean, head, and tail them. Then throw them
in boiling water, in which you have put a little salt and a teaspoonful
of vinegar; leave them in it about five minutes, take out, and drain.

_Broiled._--Clean and cut two pounds of eel, or of either of the others,
in pieces about three inches long. Put in a stewpan a piece of butter
the size of an egg, and set it on the fire; when hot, lay the eels in,
fry about three minutes, turning them over the while; then turn the
whole into a crockery vessel, add a teaspoonful of chopped parsley and
onions, a pinch of grated nutmeg, a tablespoonful of sweet-oil, salt,
and pepper; set on the fire and simmer two hours; take off, roll the
pieces in fine bread-crumbs, place them on a gridiron, and on a good
fire, and serve when done with _piquante_ sauce.

From the nature of their flesh, eels require to be prepared thus; and,
when properly done, make really a very good dish.

_Roasted._--Prepare the eels as for broiling, and, instead of placing on
the gridiron, envelop them in oiled paper and roast before a sharp fire.
Serve with _piquante_, _ravigote_, or Tartar sauce.

_Fried._--Prepare as for broiling as far as rolling in bread-crumbs,
then dip in beaten-egg, roll in bread-crumbs again, and fry. (_See_
Frying.) Serve with tomato-sauce, or just as it is.

_In Maitre d'hotel._--Clean as directed, but boil twenty minutes instead
of five. Serve with a _maitre d'hotel_ sauce and steamed potatoes, or
with muscle, oyster, shrimp, or Tartar sauce.

_In Matelote._--(_See_ Fish in Matelote.)

_Stuffed._--Clean as directed; stuff it with currant jelly, bake or
roast, and serve with currant jelly.

_Flounder_ (wrongly called _sole_; the flounder is as good as the
sole--the soles that may be found here are imported from Europe or from
Newfoundland), _dab-fish_, and _plaice_, after being baked or boiled,
may be served with the following sauces:

_Allemande_, _anchovy_, _anchovy-butter_, _Mayonnaise_, _tomato_, and
_au gratin_.

_Baked._--Clean three pounds of the above fish. Put in a crockery dish
four ounces of butter, set it on a good fire, and when melted sprinkle
in it a teaspoonful of flour, stirring the while; also, a pinch of
grated nutmeg, salt, pepper, a saltspoonful of chopped parsley, two or
three mushrooms, also chopped, then the fish; pour on it a glass of
white wine, and a liquor-glass of French brandy; cover the dish, take it
from the fire, and put it in a moderately heated oven, and serve when
done just as it is, and in the crockery dish.

_A la Normande_.--Bone and skin the fish as directed. For a fish
weighing four pounds, spread two ounces of butter on the bottom of a
baking-pan; spread one onion, chopped fine, over the butter, and as much
carrot, cut in small dice. Place the fish over the whole, the pieces as
they are, or cut according to the size of the pan, salt and pepper, and
bake. Take from the oven when done and dish the fish, leaving the juice
in the pan; cut the stems of about a dozen mushrooms; place the heads on
the middle of the fish, and the stems around it.

Mix cold a tablespoonful of flour and the same of butter in a saucepan,
turn into it a pint of broth, set on the fire and stir continually; when
thoroughly mixed, turn into it also, and through a strainer, the juice
from the pan in which the fish has baked; stir again two or three
minutes; turn gently over the fish, put in the oven for about ten
minutes, and serve hot. _Croutons_ may be placed around the dish as a
decoration.

_Another Normande._--Bone and skin the fish as directed; butter well the
dish on which the fish is to be served, spread some chopped onion all
over, then place the fish over it; sprinkle salt, pepper, and white wine
or vinegar (a tablespoonful to a pound of fish), all over the fish, and
bake it. It takes about fifteen minutes for a fish weighing two or three
pounds. Wine is better than vinegar.

While the fish is baking, set a saucepan on the fire with an ounce of
butter in it, and when melted, add half a tablespoonful of flour; stir,
and when turning yellow, add also half a pint of broth or water, salt,
then the juice from the fish when baked, stir, give one boil, and turn
over the fish.

Blanch a dozen or so of oysters, place them all over the fish also.

Have ready two or three potatoes, cut with a round vegetable spoon;
boil till done; place them around the fish as a border for it; dust then
the whole with bread-crumbs, put in a warm oven for about fifteen
minutes, take off, place half a dozen _croutons_ all around the dish
also, and serve.

The _croutons_ are generally cut of a heart-shape. It will be easily
done if the directions are followed properly and carefully.

Commence by cutting the bread, then cut the potatoes, and set them on
the fire with cold water and salt; while they are cooking, prepare the
fish and set it in the oven; while this is baking, make the sauce, fry
the _croutons_, and blanch the oysters. If the fish is baked before the
rest are ready, take it off and keep warm till wanted. It makes a
sightly and excellent dish.

_The same fried._--Small flounders are fried like other small fish, and
served either with or without a tomato-sauce or _a la Orly_.

_The same, boned and fried._--Bone and skin small flounders as directed;
mix together a tablespoonful of oil, a teaspoonful of chopped parsley,
the juice of half a lemon, and salt; dip the pieces of fish in the
mixture, dust them slightly with flour, and fry. Serve hot.

_Pike, Pickerel, and Trout or Troutlet._--Those three fish, besides
being prepared as directed for bass, etc., and in all its different
ways, they are boiled as directed and served warm, with a _genoise_
sauce.

A more delicious dish of fish can hardly be prepared.

_Ray, Skate, and Angel or Monk fish._--Ray, though excellent, is very
little known; there is only one place at which it can be
bought--Washington Market, New York.

It is unquestionably an excellent dish, prepared _au beurre noir_. When
clean, boil the fish as directed, and dish it, sprinkling salt and
pepper on it.

While it is boiling, put about two ounces of butter to a pound of fish
in a frying-pan, set it on a sharp fire, stir now and then, and when
brown, throw into it about six sprigs of parsley, which you take off
immediately with a skimmer. As soon as the parsley is taken off, pour
the butter over the fish, quickly put two tablespoonfuls of vinegar in
the frying-pan and over the fire, give one boil, and pour also over the
fish. Frying the parsley and boiling the vinegar cannot be done too
fast, as the fish must be served very warm. The warmer it is served, the
better it is.

_Salmon_, _sturgeon_, and _white-fish_, after being baked or boiled, may
be served with a caper, and also with a _Mayonnaise_ sauce. They may
also be served in _court bouillon_, like bass. They are broiled whole,
or in slices, and served with a _maitre d'hotel_ or a caper sauce.

_The same in Fricandeau._--Cut the fish in slices about half an inch
thick, and place them in a saucepan with slices of fat salt pork,
carrots and onions under them; set on a good fire; ten minutes after,
add a little broth, just enough to cover the bottom of the pan; after
about five minutes, turn the slices over; finish the cooking and serve
with the gravy strained over the fish, or with a tomato-sauce.

_The same in Papillotes._--Fry slices of salmon with a little butter,
and until of a golden color; take them from the fire. While they are
frying, mix well together parsley chopped fine, salt, pepper, melted
butter, grated nutmeg, and a little lemon-juice; spread some of the
mixture on both sides of the slices of fish, envelop them in buttered or
oiled paper; broil, and serve them hot.

Some mushrooms or truffles, or both, and chopped, may be added to the
mixture.

_The same a la Genevoise._--Put in a saucepan a thick slice of
salmon--from five to six pounds; just cover it with broth and claret
wine--half of each; season with a bunch of seasonings composed of six or
eight sprigs of parsley, two of thyme, two bay-leaves, two cloves, and
two cloves of garlic, salt, a few slices of carrot, and a small green
onion, or a shallot, if handy. Boil gently till nearly done, when add
about a dozen mushrooms, and keep boiling till done; dish the fish, and
put it in a warm but not hot place; mix cold, in a saucepan, four ounces
of butter with about two ounces of flour; turn over it, through a
strainer, the liquor in which the fish has been cooked, and set on a
sharp fire; after about three minutes, during which you have stirred
with a wooden spoon, add the mushrooms; stir again for about two
minutes, turn over the fish, and serve warm.

_The same in Salad._--Boil, as directed for fish, some thin slices of
salmon, drain, and serve cold, on a napkin and on a dish.

Serve with it, and in a boat, the following: half a teaspoonful of salt,
a pinch of pepper, two tablespoonfuls of vinegar, four of sweet oil, a
pickled cucumber chopped fine, two hard-boiled eggs, chopped fine also,
two or three anchovies, and a tablespoonful of capers; the anchovies may
be chopped fine or pounded. Beat the whole well and serve.

_The same in Scallops._--Cut it in round slices, about one-eighth of an
inch in thickness; fry them with butter, and serve.

The pieces should be tastefully arranged on a dish, imitating a flight
of stairs.

_Broiled._--Cut it in rather thin slices, butter both sides with a
brush; broil, and serve with a _maitre d'hotel_.

_Shad_ and _sheep's-head_, after being baked or boiled, are served with
an anchovy, caper, or tomato sauce. They are also served cold, _a la
vinaigrette_.

_Broiled._--When cleaned and prepared, salt, pepper, and butter it;
broil and serve it with a _maitre d'hotel_.

It may be _stuffed_ as directed for fish.

_In Provencale._--Clean, prepare, and cut the fish in pieces about two
inches long; put about three pounds of it in a saucepan, with a pint of
claret; six stalks of parsley, a small onion, a clove of garlic, and six
mushrooms, all chopped fine; boil till done, when add four ounces of
butter, and two of flour, well kneaded together; boil three minutes
longer, and serve warm.

_Another way, or a la Chambord._--Stuff the fish with sausage-meat,
envelop it in a towel, boil, and serve it with a tomato-sauce.

_The same with Sorrel._--Broil the fish, and serve it on a puree of
sorrel or of spinach.

It may also be prepared _au court bouillon_, _a la Bretonne_, and _aux
fines herbes_, like bass, etc.

_Sheep's-head_ may also be prepared like turbot.

_Au Gratin._--The shad, after being cleaned, but not split on the back
(as is too often the case, to the shame of the fishmongers who begin by
spoiling the fish under the pretence of cleaning it), is placed in a
bake-pan, having butter, chopped parsley, mushroom, salt, and pepper,
both under and above the fish. For a fish weighing three pounds, add one
gill of broth and half as much of white wine; dust the fish with
bread-crumbs, and set in a pretty quick oven.

Fifteen minutes afterward, examine it. When done, the fish is dished, a
little broth is put in the pan, which is placed on a sharp fire; stir
with a spoon or fork so as to detach the bread, etc., that may stick to
the pan, then pour this over the fish, and serve warm.

The gravy must be reduced to two or three tablespoonfuls only, for a
fish weighing about two pounds.

The fish must be dished carefully in order not to break it.

_Sterlet._--This is a fish of the sturgeon family, very plentiful in the
Caspian Sea and in many Russian rivers, principally in the Neva and in
Lake Ladoga.

_Tunny_ and _bonito_, after being boiled, are served cold in
_vinaigrette_.

_Turbot and Whiff._--Turbot is among fishes what pheasant is among
birds. Rub it with lemon before cooking it.

After being boiled or baked, as directed, it is served with the
following sauces: _Bechamel_, _cream_, _caper_, _Hollandaise_,
_Mayonnaise_, _tomato_, and in _vinaigrette_.

It is also served _au court-bouillon_ and _aux fines herbes_ like bass.

_Au Gratin._--It is prepared and served like shad au gratin.

It is also broiled and served with a _maitre d'hotel_.

_Bordelaise._--Bone and skin the fish as directed; dip each piece in
melted butter, then in beaten egg, roll in bread-crumbs and broil. While
it is broiling on a rather slow fire, turn it over several times and
keep basting with melted butter; the more butter it absorbs the better
the fish.

When broiled, serve the slices on a dish and place some boiled craw-fish
all around and in the middle. A dish of steamed potatoes is served with
it.

The following sauce is also served at the same time: Chop fine and fry
till half done, with a little butter, two small green onions or four
shallots. Put half a pint of good meat-gravy in a small saucepan; set on
the fire, and as soon as it commences to boil, pour into it, little by
little, stirring the while with a wooden spoon, about a gill of Bordeaux
wine, then the onions or shallots, and also a piece of beef marrow
chopped fine; give one boil, and serve in a saucer.

_In Salad._--Proceed as for salmon in salad.

When _boiled_, serve the turbot with anchovy-butter, lobster-butter,
lobster-sauce, or muscle-sauce.

_Cold._--Any cold piece of turbot is served with a _Mayonnaise_ sauce,
or in _vinaigrette_.

_Cold Fish._--If the fish is with sauce, that is, if the sauce is in the
same dish with the fish, warm it in the _bain-marie_, and serve warm.
Any other piece of cold fish, baked, boiled, broiled, or roasted, is
served with a _Mayonnaise_ sauce, or with a _vinaigrette_.

Any kind of cold fish may be prepared in salad. Slice the fish or cut it
in pieces and put it in the salad-dish with hard-boiled egg sliced,
onion and parsley chopped fine, salt, pepper, vinegar, and oil. Mix the
whole gently and well, and serve.

_Anchovy._--It is imported preserved. It is used as a _hors-d'oeuvre_,
to decorate or season.

The essence of anchovy is used for sauce.

The smallest are considered the best.

To serve as a _hors d'oeuvre_, wash, wipe dry, and remove the backbone,
serve with tarragon or parsley, chopped fine, vinegar, and oil.

They may also be served with hard-boiled eggs, chopped or quartered.

_Sprats._--There are none in or near American waters; they are imported
under their French name, sardines. Fresh sprats are very good boiled
without any grease, and without being cleaned and prepared like other
fish; but when on the plate, skin them, which is easily done, as then
the flesh is so easily detached from the bones that the inside need not
be touched at all; they are eaten with salt and pepper only.

Sardines are served as a _hors-d'oeuvre_, with oil and lemon-juice, and
properly scaled. They are arranged on the dish according to fancy,
together with lemon in slices.

_Salt Cod--to prepare._--Soak it in cold water for two days, changing
the water two or three times; then scale it well and clean. Lay it in a
fish-kettle, cover with cold water, set on a rather slow fire, skim off
the scum, let it boil about one minute, take the kettle from the fire,
cover it well, and leave thus ten minutes; then take off the cod, and
drain it.

_In Bechamel._--Prepare it as above, and serve with a bechamel sauce,
and as warm as possible.

_With a Cream-Sauce._--Prepare as above, and serve either warm or cold
with a cream-sauce.

_In Brown Butter._--When prepared as above, place it on a dish, and keep
it in a warm place. Put four ounces of butter in a frying-pan, and on a
good fire; when turning brown, add three sprigs of parsley, fry about
two minutes, pour the whole on the fish, and serve. You may also pour on
it a hot caper-sauce, and serve.

_With Croutons._--Prepare and cook as directed, three pounds of cod;
take the bones out, break in small pieces, and mash with the hand as
much as possible; put it then in a stewpan, beat three yolks of eggs
with two tablespoonfuls of cream, and mix with the cod; set on a slow
fire, and immediately pour in, little by little, stirring the while,
about one gill of sweet oil; simmer ten or twelve minutes, and serve
with _croutons_ around.

_In Maitre d'Hotel._--Lay three pounds of cod on a dish, after being
cooked as directed; keep it warm, spread a _maitre d'hotel_ sauce on it,
and serve.

_With Potatoes._--Prepare about three pounds of cod as directed above.
Lay the fish on a dish; have a _piquante_ sauce ready, turn it over it,
and serve with steamed potatoes all around the dish. The potatoes may
also be served separately.

_In Vinaigrette._--Prepare as directed, and when cold, serve with a
vinaigrette.

_With Cheese._--Prepare the cod as directed, then dip it in lukewarm
butter, roll it in grated cheese, lay it in a baking-pan, dust slightly
with bread-crumbs; bake, and serve warm. Two or three minutes in a quick
oven will be sufficient.

_Au Gratin._--When soaked only and wiped dry, but not boiled, prepare it
as directed for fish au gratin.

_With Caper-Sauce._--Prepare it as directed, and serve warm with
caper-sauce.

_Salt Salmon._--Soak it in cold water for some time, the length of time
to be according to the saltness of the fish; scale and clean it well,
lay it in a fish-kettle, cover it with cold water, and set it on a
moderate fire. Boil gently about two minutes, skim off the scum, take
from the kettle and drain it. Put butter in a frying-pan and set it on
the fire; when it turns rather brown, put a few sprigs of parsley in it,
and immediately pour it over the fish in the dish; add a few drops of
lemon-juice all over, and serve warm.

It may also be served with a caper or _maitre d'hotel_ sauce; or, when
cold, serve _a la vinaigrette_.

Salt salmon is also served like salt cod-fish.

It may also be served on a _puree_ of celery or of onion.

_Smoked Salmon._--Cut it in thin slices; have very hot butter or oil in
a frying-pan, and lay the slices in only long enough to warm them; then
take out, drain them, and serve with a few drops of lemon-juice or
vinegar sprinkled on them.

_Tunny._--This is not a good fish fresh; it is generally preserved, and
served as a _hors-d'oeuvre_. It comes from Holland, Italy, and the south
of France.

Fresh, it is prepared like sturgeon. That prepared in Holland is the
best. The Dutch cure fish better than any other nation.

When you serve tunny, take it out of the bottle or jar and serve it on a
small plate, or on a dessert-plate. A very small piece is served,
generally like every other _hors-d'oeuvre_.

_Salt Herring._--Soak in cold or tepid water; if soaked in tepid water,
it does not require as long; the time must be according to the quality
or saltness of the fish. Wipe dry, broil, and serve like salt mackerel.

_Another way._--Salt herring may also be soaked in half water and half
milk, or in milk only; drain and wipe dry. Bone and skin, cut off the
head, tail, and fins, and serve with oil, vinegar, and pickled
cucumbers.

They are also served with slices of sour apples, or slices of onions,
after being soaked and wiped dry.

They may also be broiled slightly and served with oil only, after being
soaked, or served with sour grape-juice.

_Salt Pike._--It is prepared and served the same as salt herring; so is
pickled trout.

_Red Herring._--Wipe or skin them, they are not as good when washed; cut
off the head and tail, split the back open, lay them on a warm and
well-greased gridiron, set on a slow fire; spread some butter or oil on
them, turn over, do the same on the other side; broil very little, and
serve with a _vinaigrette_ and mustard to taste.

_Another way._--Clean and split them as above, soak them in lukewarm
water for two hours; take out, drain, and wipe dry. Mix two or three
yolks of eggs with a teaspoonful of chopped parsley, salt, pepper, and a
little melted butter; put some of the mixture around every herring, then
roll them in fine bread-crumbs, place them on a gridiron on a slow fire:
and when lightly broiled, serve as the preceding one.

Red herring may also be broiled with bread-crumbs like salt herring.

It is also served as a _hors-d'oeuvre_, cut in slices.

_Salt Mackerel broiled._--If the fish be too salt, soak it for a while
in lukewarm water, take off and wipe dry. Have a little melted fat or
lard, dip a brush in it and grease slightly both sides of the fish;
place on or inside of the gridiron, the bars of which must also be
greased; set on, or before, or under a pretty sharp fire; broil both
sides; dish the fish, the skin under; spread butter on it; also parsley
chopped fine, and serve.

Lemon-juice may be added if liked, or a few drops of vinegar.

When broiled and dished, spread a _maitre d'hotel_ on it, and serve.

_Another way._--When soaked and wiped dry, dip in melted butter, again
in beaten eggs, and roll in bread-crumbs. Broil and serve with parsley
and lemon-juice, or with a _maitre d'hotel_.


  FROGS.

The hind-legs of frogs only are used as food; formerly they were eaten
by the French only, but now, frog-eating has become general, and the
Americans are not behind any others in relishing that kind of food.

_Fried._--Skin well, and throw into boiling water with a little salt,
for five minutes, the hind-legs only; take out and throw them in cold
water to cool, and drain. Have hot fat in a pan on the fire (_see_
Directions for Frying); lay the frogs in, and serve when done with fried
parsley around.

_Stewed._--Skin, boil five minutes, throw in cold water, and drain as
above. Put in a stewpan two ounces of butter (for two dozen frogs); set
it on the fire, and when melted, lay the legs in, fry two minutes,
tossing now and then; then sprinkle on them a teaspoonful of flour, stir
with a wooden spoon, add two sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, a
bay-leaf, two cloves, one of garlic, salt, white pepper, and half a pint
of white wine; boil gently till done, dish the legs, reduce the sauce on
the fire, strain it, mix in it two yolks of eggs, pour on the legs, and
serve them.


  LOBSTER.

Never buy a dead lobster.

Large lobsters are not as good as small ones. From about one to two
pounds and a half in weight are the best. The heavier the better.

Lobsters are better at some seasons of the year than at others. They are
inferior when full of eggs.

It is from mere prejudice that the liver (also called _tomalley_) is
eschewed. This prejudice may come from its turning green on boiling the
lobster.

Use every thing but the stomach and the black of bluish vein running
along its back and tail.

Boil your lobsters yourself; because, if you buy them already boiled,
you do not know if they were alive when put in the kettle.

A lobster boiled after being dead is watery, soft, and not full; besides
being very unhealthy, if not dangerous.

A lobster suffers less by being put in cold than in boiling water, and
the flesh is firmer when done. In putting it in boiling water it is
killed by the heat; in cold water it is dead as soon as the water gets
warm.

_To boil._.--Lay it in a fish-kettle; just cover it with cold water,
cover the kettle, and set it on a sharp fire.

It takes from fifteen to twenty-five minutes' boiling, according to the
size of the lobster.

When boiled, take it from the kettle, break it in two, that is, separate
the body from the tail, and place it in a colander to let the water
drain.

_In the shell._--When the lobster is boiled, divide it in two, taking
care not to break the body and large claws. The tail is then split in
two, lengthwise, the flesh taken off, cut in small dice, and mixed with
the inside of the lobster.

The vein found immediately under the shell, all along the flesh of the
lobster, is removed as soon as it is split. The stomach, found near the
head, is removed also and thrown away; all the rest is good, including
the liver.

When the flesh and inside are properly mixed, season with salt, pepper,
vinegar, oil, mustard, and chopped parsley.

Place the body of the lobster on the middle of a dish, the head up, the
two large claws stretched out, and the two feelers stretched out also
and fastened between the claws. A sprig of parsley is put in each claw,
at the end of it, in the small claws as well as in the two large ones.
Then the two empty halves of the tail-piece are put around the body of
the lobster, the prepared flesh placed around them; hard-boiled eggs cut
in eight pieces each are placed around the dish, tastefully arranged;
some slices of red, pickled beets and cut with paste-cutters, are placed
between each piece of egg, and serve.

It makes a simple, good, and very sightly dish.

Half a dozen boiled craw-fish may be placed around the dish also; it
will add to the decoration.

Two middling-sized lobsters prepared thus will fill a very large dish.
They should be placed back to back, with only a few craw-fish between,
and the rest arranged as the above.

_In Salad._--Boil the lobster as directed; break and drain it as
directed also. Slice the flesh of the tail, place it tastefully on a
dish; also the flesh from the two large claws, which may be sliced or
served whole. Lettuce, or hard-boiled eggs, or both, may be arranged on
the dish also, and served with the following sauce:

Put in a boat or saucer all the inside save the stomach, with salt,
pepper, vinegar, oil, mustard, and chopped parsley, to taste; beat and
mix the whole well together, and serve. In case there are eggs, these
are also to be mixed with the rest.

_Another._--Boil and drain as directed; cut all the flesh in dice, and
put it in a bowl with the inside, some lettuce cut rather fine, salt,
pepper, vinegar, mustard, and very little oil; mix well, and then put
the mixture on a dish, placing it like a mound on the middle of the
dish; spread a _Mayonnaise_ sauce over it; decorate with the centre
leaves of the lettuce, some hard-boiled eggs cut in slices or in fancy
shapes, capers, boiled or pickled red beets, cut also in fancy shapes,
slices of lemon, and serve.

Anchovies, olives, pickled cucumbers, or any other pickled fruit or
vegetable may also be added.

A rose, or two or three pinks, may be placed right on the top, as a
decoration. Just before commencing to serve, the rose may be put on a
dessert plate and offered to a lady.

_In Coquilles, or Scalloped._--It is boiled and then finished like
oysters scalloped.

It may be served thus on scallop-shells, on silver shells, or on its own
shell; that is, on the shell of the tail, split in two lengthwise, and
trimmed according to fancy.

_Croquettes._--Lobster croquettes are made exactly like _fish-balls_,
and then fried according to directions for frying.

They are served warm. It is an excellent dish for _breakfast_.

_Fried._--To be fried, the lobster must be bled; separate the body from
the tail, then cut the tail in pieces, making as many pieces as there
are joints. Put these pieces in a frying-pan with two or three ounces of
butter, and one onion, chopped fine; set on a sharp fire, stir now and
then tin the whole is fried, then add a bunch of seasoning composed of
three sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, a bay-leaf, and a clove; salt,
pepper, and three gills of Madeira wine; boil gently till reduced about
half; dish the pieces of lobster according to fancy; add two or three
tablespoonfuls of gravy to the sauce, stir it, give one boil, and turn
it over the lobster through a strainer; serve warm.

_Another way._--Proceed as above in every particular, except that you
use Sauterne or Catawba wine instead of Madeira, and, besides the
seasonings, add half a dozen mushrooms, or two truffles, or both.

Dish the mushrooms and truffles with the lobster, then finish and serve
as the above.

_Craw-fish._--These are found in most of the lakes, brooks, and rivers.

In some places they are called _river-crabs_, or freshwater crabs.

They resemble the lobster, and are often taken for young lobsters.

Besides being a beautiful ornament and much used to decorate dishes,
they are excellent to eat and very light.

They are dressed and served like lobsters and crabs.

Fishermen are sure to find a ready market for them, though they are, as
yet, very little known.

_Crabs._--Crabs are boiled like lobsters, and may be served like
lobster, _in salad_. They are often eaten, only boiled, without any
seasonings.

Like lobsters also, to be good, crabs must be put in the water alive.

When well washed and clean, they may be prepared in the following way:
Put them in a saucepan with slices of onions, same of carrots, parsley,
chives if handy, thyme, bay-leaves, cloves, salt, and pepper-corns; half
cover them with white wine, add butter, set on a good fire, and boil
till done. Serve with parsley only.

The sauce may be used a second time by adding a little wine.

The _soft-shell crab_ is blanched five minutes, and _fried_ like fish.

It may also be _saute_ with a little butter, and served with a _maitre
d'hotel_.

_Broil_ it also, and serve it with a _maitre d'hotel_.

_Muscles._--These are unwholesome between April and September. They
must be heavy, fresh, and of a middling size. The very large ones are
really inferior.

Soak them in water and wash well several times, then drain.

_In Poulette._--Put them in a saucepan with a little parsley chopped
fine, and set them on a pretty good fire; as soon as they are opened,
remove the shell to which they are not attached, and keep them in a warm
place.

For two quarts of muscles, put two ounces of butter in the saucepan in
which they have been cooked and in which you have left their liquor; set
on the fire, stir, and as soon as the butter is melted, add and stir
into it a tablespoonful of flour; when turning a little yellow, add also
half a dozen pepper-corns, then the muscles; boil gently about ten
minutes, stirring occasionally; take from the fire, mix one or two yolks
of eggs with it, a little lemon-juice, parsley chopped fine, and serve
warm.

_Another way._--When clean, put them in a saucepan with a few slices of
carrot, same of onion, two or three stalks of parsley, one of thyme, a
bay-leaf, two cloves, six pepper-corns, and salt. Set on the fire, and
take the muscles from the pan as soon as they open, then remove one
shell; put them back in the pan, with as much white wine as there is
liquor from the muscles; boil gently about ten minutes, add the yolk of
an egg, a little lemon-juice, and dish the muscles; drain the sauce over
them, add a little chopped parsley, and serve warm.

_Fried._--Fry, and serve the muscles like fried oysters. They may also
be served like scalloped oysters.

_Prawns and Shrimps._--Wash, boil in water and salt, and serve. They may
be used, like craw-fish, to decorate fish after being boiled.

_Another way._--Wash well, and put two quarts of them in a saucepan
with four onions in slices, two sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, a
bay-leaf, two cloves, salt, pepper, half a pint of white wine, and two
ounces of butter, just cover with water and set on a good fire; when
properly cooked, drain, and serve warm with green parsley all around.
The liquor may be used a second time.


  OYSTERS.

The American oyster is unquestionably the best that can be found. It
varies in taste according to how it is treated, either after being
dredged or while embedded; and also according to the nature of the soil
and water in which they have lived. It is very wrong to wash oysters. We
mean by washing oysters, the abominable habit of throwing oysters in
cold water, as soon as opened, and then sold by the measure. It is more
than a pity to thus spoil such an excellent and delicate article of
food.

Oysters, like lobsters, are not good when dead. To ascertain if they are
alive, as soon as opened and when one of the shells is removed, touch
gently the edge of the oyster, and, if alive, it will contract.

_Raw._--When well washed, open them, detaching the upper shell, then
detach them from the under shell, but leave them on it; place on a dish,
and leave the upper shell on every oyster, and serve thus.

To eat them, you remove the upper shell, sprinkle salt, pepper, and
lemon-juice on, and eat.

When raw oysters are served on a table, at which there are gentlemen
only, some shallots, chopped fine and gently bruised in a coarse towel,
are served with them, on a separate dish. The taste of the shallot
agrees very well with that of the oyster.

A Tartar sauce may be served instead of shallots.

_To blanch._--Set the oysters and a little water on the fire in a
saucepan, take them off at the first boil, skim off the scum from the
top, strain them, and drop them in cold water.

The skimming, straining, and dropping in cold water must be done
quickly--the quicker the better. If allowed to stay in the warm water,
or out of water, they get tough.

In dropping them in cold water, see that they are free from pieces of
shell; take them with a fork if necessary.

As soon as in cold water they are ready for use, but they must always be
drained again before using them.

When the water used to blanch is employed in preparing them, it is
explained in the different receipts.

White wine may be used, instead of water, to blanch them, according to
taste.

_Fried._--Open the oysters, and put them in a colander for about half an
hour. They must be as well drained as possible. Then dip them in egg and
roll in bread-crumbs in the following way: Beat one or two, or three,
eggs (according to the quantity of oysters to be fried), as for an
omelet, turn the oysters into the eggs and stir gently; then take one
after another, roll in bread-crumbs; place each one on your left hand,
in taking them from the crumbs, and with the other hand press gently on
it. Put them away in a cool place for about half an hour, and then dip
again in egg, roll in bread-crumbs, and press in the hand as before. It
is not indispensable to dip in egg and roll in crumbs a second time; but
the oysters are better, and you are well repaid for the little extra
work it requires. While you are preparing them, set some fat on the fire
in a pan, and when hot enough (_see_ Frying) drop the oysters in, stir
gently, take off with a skimmer when fried, turn into a colander, add
salt, and serve hot.

_Roasted._--Place the oysters on a hot stove or range, or on coals, and
as soon as they open take off, remove one shell; turn a little melted
butter on each, and serve.

There are several other ways.

When blanched, they are served on toast, a little gravy is added, the
toast placed on a dessert-plate, and served thus.

_Broiled_ and roasted as above is the same thing.

Oysters scalloped on their own shell, and placed on the range instead of
in the oven, are also called broiled.

_Scalloped._--Place the oysters when thoroughly washed on a hot stove,
and as soon as they open remove one shell, the flatter one of the two,
and take them from the fire. Sprinkle salt, pepper, chopped parsley, and
bread-crumbs on them; place on each a piece of butter the size of a
hazel-nut; put in the oven about ten minutes, and when done add a few
drops of meat-gravy, to each, and serve hot.

_Another._--Put a quart of oysters and their liquor in a saucepan, set
it on the fire, take off at the first boil, and drain. Set a saucepan on
the fire with two ounces of butter in it; as soon as melted, add a
teaspoonful of flour, stir, and, when turning rather brown, add the
juice of the oysters, about a gill of gravy, salt, and pepper; boil
gently for about ten minutes, stirring now and then. While it is
boiling, place the oysters on scallop-shells, or on silver shells made
for that purpose, two or three oysters on each, turn some of the above
sauce on each, after it has boiled; dust with bread-crumbs, put a little
piece of butter on each shell, and bake for about twelve minutes in a
warm oven.

A dozen silver shells served thus make a sightly and excellent dish.

Some truffles, chopped fine, may be added to the sauce, two minutes
before taking it from the fire.

_Stewed._--Procure two quarts of good and fresh oysters. Set them on a
sharp fire, with their liquor and a little water, and blanch as
directed. Put four ounces of butter in a saucepan, set on the fire, and
when melted stir into it a small tablespoonful of flour; as soon as
mixed, add also a teaspoonful of parsley, chopped fine, and about half a
pint of broth; boil gently about ten minutes, then add the oysters, salt
and pepper, boil again about one minute, dish the whole, sprinkle
lemon-juice on, and serve.

An oyster soup is often called a stew.

_In Poulette._--In adding chopped mushrooms to the stewed oysters, at
the same time that the oysters are put in the pan, you make them in
_poulette_.

_A la Washington._--Fried oysters are called _a la Washington_, when
two, three, or four very large oysters are put together (they adhere
very easily), dipped in egg, rolled in bread-crumbs, and fried, as
directed above. It is necessary to have a deep pan, and much fat, to
immerse them completely.

_Pickled_ oysters are always served as a _hors d'oeuvre_. Place around
the oysters some hard-boiled eggs, chopped fine, and serve with oil and
vinegar.

Serve them in the same way, with slices of truffles instead of
hard-boiled eggs.

They may also be served with lemon-juice only.

Or with shallots chopped fine, and then bruised in a coarse towel. This
last one is considered of too strong a taste for ladies.

They are also served with a Tartar sauce.

_Scallops._--Blanch the scallops for three minutes, drain them. Put
butter on the fire in a frying-pan, and when melted turn the scallops
in; stir now and then, take from the fire when fried, add parsley
chopped fine, salt, pepper, and serve warm.

_On the Shell._--Chop fine a middling-sized onion, and fry it with one
ounce of butter. While the onion is frying, chop fine also one quart of
scallops and put them with the onion; stir for two or three minutes, or
till about half fried, when turn the juice off, put back on the fire,
and add one ounce of butter, one gill of white wine, stir for two or
three minutes, and if too thick add the juice you have turned off; take
from the fire, and mix a yolk of egg with it, add salt, pepper, nutmeg
grated, and parsley chopped fine.

Have the scallop shells properly cleaned, or silver shells, spread the
mixture on the shells; dust with bread-crumbs, put a piece of butter
about the size of a hazel-nut on each, and put in an oven, at about 320
deg. Fahr., for from ten to fifteen minutes.

This is a dish for _breakfast_.

Scallop, scollop, or escalop, are one and the same fish.


  CLAMS.

Wash clean with a scrubbing-brush and put them in a kettle; set on a
good fire, and leave till they are wide open; then take from the kettle,
cut each in two or three pieces, put them in a stewpan with all the
water they have disgorged in the kettle, and about four ounces of butter
for fifty clams; boil slowly about an hour, take from the fire, and mix
with the whole two beaten eggs, and serve warm.

Clams are also eaten raw with vinegar, salt, and pepper.

_Chowder._--This popular dish is made in a hundred different ways, but
the result is about the same.

It is generally admitted that boatmen prepare it better than others, and
the receipts we give below came from the most experienced chowder-men of
the Harlem River.

Potatoes and crackers are used in different proportions, the more used,
the thicker the chowder will be.

Put in a _pot_ (technical name) some small slices of fat salt pork,
enough to line the bottom of it; on that, a layer of potatoes, cut in
small pieces; on the potatoes, a layer of chopped onions; on the onions,
a layer of tomatoes, in slices, or canned tomatoes; on the latter a
layer of clams, whole or chopped (they are generally chopped), then a
layer of crackers.

Then repeat the process, that is, another layer of potatoes on that of
the clams; on this, one of onions, etc., till the pot is nearly full.
Every layer is seasoned with salt and pepper. Other spices are sometimes
added according to taste; such as thyme, cloves, bay-leaves, and
tarragon.

When the whole is in, cover with water, set on a slow fire, and when
nearly done, stir gently, finish cooking, and serve.

As we remarked above, the more potatoes that are used, the thicker it
will be.

When done, if found too thin, boil a little longer; if found too thick,
add a little water, give one boil, and serve.

_Another way._--Proceed as above in every particular, except that you
omit the clams and crackers, and when the rest is nearly cooked, then
add the chopped clams and broken crackers, boil fast about twenty-five
minutes longer, and serve.

If found too thick or too thin, proceed exactly as for the one above.

_Fish Chowder._--This is made exactly as clam chowder, using fish
instead of clams.

_Clam Bake._--This is how it is made by the Harlem River clam-baker, Tom
Riley.

Lay the clams on a rock, edge downward, and forming a circle, cover them
with fine brush; cover the brush with dry sage; cover the sage with
larger brush; set the whole on fire, and when a little more than half
burnt (brush and sage), look at the clams by pulling some out, and if
done enough, brush the fire, cinders, etc., off; mix some tomato or
cauliflower sauce, or catsup, with the clams (minus their shells); add
butter and spices to taste, and serve.

Done on sand, the clams, in opening, naturally allow the sand to get in,
and it is anything but pleasant for the teeth while eating them.




  BEEF.


  HOW TO SELECT.

See if the meat is fine, of a clear red color, with yellowish-white fat.


  COW BEEF.

Cow beef must also be of a clear red color, but more pale than other
beef; the fat is white.


  BULL BEEF.

Bull beef is never good; you recognize it when you see hard and yellow
fat; the lean part is of a dirty-reddish color.

The rump piece is generally prepared _a la mode_. For steaks, the
tenderloin and the piece called the porter-house steak, are the best;
rump steaks are seldom tender.

The roasting or baking pieces are the tenderloin, the fillet, and some
cuts of the ribs.

For soup, every piece is good; to make rich broth, take pieces of the
rump, sucket, round, etc., but every piece makes excellent broth, and
therefore excellent soup. (_See_ Broth.)

A good piece of rib, prepared like a fillet or tenderloin, makes an
excellent dish, the bones and meat around them being used to make
broth.


  A LA MODE.

Take from six to twelve pounds of rump and lard it. To lard it you take
a steel needle made for that purpose, flat near the pointed end and much
larger than an ordinary larding-needle. It must be flat near the point
in order to cut the meat so as to make room for the larger part of the
needle to pass, and also for the salt pork. This needle is only used for
beef _a la mode_.

Cut the salt pork in square strips to fit the needle, (_see_ Larding),
and proceed.

Examine the piece of beef, lard with the grain of the meat, so that when
it is carved the salt pork shall be cut across.

If the piece is too thick to run the strip of pork through, so that both
ends stick out, lard one side first then the other. We mean by one side
first, this: to be easily handled, the salt pork cannot be cut longer
than about four inches; as half an inch of it must stick out of the
meat, it leaves only three inches inside, and if the piece of meat be
six inches or more thick, of course it would be impossible to have the
strip of pork stick out on both sides; therefore, you lard one side
first; that is, you run the needle through the meat, leaving the salt
pork stick out on the side you commence, and when that side is larded,
do the same for the other. You have then the salt pork sticking out on
both sides of the meat and looking just as if the strips were running
through the whole piece.

Some like more salt pork than others in the beef; the strips may be run
thickly or thinly.

Thirty strips may be run into three pounds of meat as well as half a
dozen; but about half a pound of salt pork to five pounds of beef is a
pretty good proportion.

Then take a saucepan of a proper size for the piece of meat; it must not
be too large or too small, but large enough to hold the meat without
being obliged to bend or fold it; a crockery pan is certainly the best
for that purpose, and one that will go easily in the oven.

Put in the saucepan, for six pounds of beef, half a calf's foot, or a
veal-bone if more handy, two ounces of butter, half a handful of parsley
(cives, if handy), two bay-leaves, a clove of garlic, a sprig of thyme,
two onions, with a clove stuck in each, salt, pepper, half a carrot cut
in slices, the rind of the salt pork you have used, and what you may
have left of strips; the whole well spread on the bottom of the pan,
then the piece of meat over, cover the pan, set on a rather sharp fire
and after about ten minutes add half a gill of water; keep the pan
covered to the end.

After another ten or fifteen minutes, add about one pint of cold water,
turn the meat over, and after about ten minutes more, place the pan in
the oven, a rather slow oven (a little above 220 degrees Fahr.), for
five or six hours. Dish the meat, skim off the fat on the top of the
gravy, give one boil and turn it over the meat and carrots through a
strainer.

When the meat is dished; put some carrots _au jus_ all around; serve
warm.

_Cold._--Serve it whole or in slices, with meat jelly, or with a sharp
sauce; such as _piquante, ravigote_, etc.


  STEWED.

Stewed beef is called also _daube_ or _braised_ beef, but it is the
same.

It may be larded as beef _a la mode_, or not; it may be put whole in the
pan or in large dice, according to taste.

The following is for five or six pounds of rump or even a piece of ribs:

Put in a saucepan two ounces of salt pork cut in dice, four sprigs of
parsley, two of thyme, two bay-leaves, a clove of garlic, a sprig of
sweet basil, two cloves, three carrots cut in pieces, salt, and pepper;
put the piece of beef on the whole, wet with a glass of broth, and one
of white wine (a liquor-glass of French brandy may also be added);
season with six or eight small onions; place in a moderately heated
oven, put paste around the cover to keep it air-tight; simmer about six
hours; dish the meat with the onions and carrots around it, strain the
gravy on the whole, and serve.

Almost any piece of beef may be cooked in the same way, and will be
found good, wholesome, and economical.


  ROASTED.

_How to improve it._--Put the meat in a tureen, with four tablespoonfuls
of sweet-oil, salt, pepper, two tablespoonfuls of chopped parsley, four
onions cut in slices, two bay-leaves, and the juice of half a lemon; put
half of all the above under the meat, and half on it; cover, and leave
thus two days in winter, and about eighteen hours in summer.

It certainly improves the meat and makes it more tender. The tenderloin
may be improved as well as any other piece.

Then place the meat on the spit before and near a very sharp fire. Baste
often with the seasonings, if you have improved the meat; or with a
little melted butter, if you have not. Continue basting with what is in
the dripping-pan.

Beef must be placed as near the fire as possible, without burning it,
however; and then, as soon as a coating or crust is formed all around,
remove it by degrees. Remember that the quicker the crust is formed, the
more juicy and tender the meat.

Nothing at all is added to form that kind of crust. It is formed by the
osmazome of the meat, attracted by the heat, and coming in contact with
the air while revolving.

Beef is more juicy when rather underdone; if good, when cut, it has a
pinky color inside.

Roast beef may be served with the drippings only, after being strained
and the fat removed.

It may also be served in the following ways:

_With Potatoes._--Fried potatoes may be served all around the meat, or
on a separate dish. Also, potato croquettes.

_With Horse-radish._--Grate horse-radish, mix it with the drippings, and
serve in a boat.

_With a Garniture._--Mix a liver garniture with the gravy, add
lemon-juice, place all around the meat, and serve.

_With Truffles._--Place the garniture of truffles on and around the
meat, turn the drippings on the whole, and serve.

_With Tomatoes._--Surround the meat with stuffed tomatoes, strain the
gravy on the whole, and serve.

_On Purees._--Spread either of the following _purees_ on the dish, place
the meat over it, strain the drippings on the whole; and serve:

_Purees_ of _asparagus_, _beans_, _cauliflowers_, _celery_, _Lima
beans_, _onions_, _green peas_, _potatoes_, and _mushrooms_.

_With Cabbage._--Surround the meat with Brussels cabbages, prepared _au
jus_; strain the drippings on the whole, and serve.

_With Quenelles._--Place twelve quenelles of chicken around the meat,
and serve with the drippings.


  TO DECORATE.

When served in any way as described above, one or two or more skewers
may be run through craw-fish and a slice of truffle, and stuck in the
meat, or through sweetbreads _au jus_, and slices of truffles. It makes
a beautiful and good decoration.

The skewers may also be run through chicken-combs, prepared as for
_farce_; first through a comb, then through a slice of truffle, through
a sweetbread, again through a slice of truffle, then through a
craw-fish, and lastly a slice of truffle, or the reverse, according to
fancy.

_With Rice._--It is surrounded with rice croquettes, the drippings
strained over the whole.

We could put down some twenty or more other ways, but any one with an
ordinary amount of natural capacity can do it, by varying the
_garnitures_, _purees_, _decorations_, etc.

Cold roast-beef is prepared like boiled beef.


  BAKED.

Place the meat in a bake-pan, with cold water about a quarter of an inch
deep; spread salt, pepper, and a little butter on the meat, cover it
with a piece of buttered paper; baste often over the paper, lest it
should burn; keep the bottom of the pan covered with juice; if the water
and juice are absorbed, add a little cold water and continue basting;
turn over two or three times, but keep the paper on the top; if it is
burnt, put on another piece. The paper keeps the top of the meat moist,
and prevents it from burning or drying.

When done, it is served like roasted beef.


  FILLET.

The tenderloin and even the sirloin are sometimes called, or rather
known, under the name of fillet, when cooked. It comes from the French
_filet_--tenderloin.

Sirloin means surloin; like stock and several others, sirloin is purely
English. The surloin is the upper part of the loin, as its prefix
indicates; it is _surlonge_ in French.

A fillet is generally larded with salt pork by means of a small brass
larding-needle; the salt pork cut in strips to fit the needle (_see_
Larding).

If you use a tenderloin, trim off the fat. If it is a piece of ribs,
prepared fillet-like, shape it like a fillet as near as possible; the
rest is used as directed above.

A piece of ribs is certainly cheaper, and can be had at any time, while
the other is as difficult to procure as it is dear.

_To lard it._--Have a towel in your left hand and place the meat over
it, the most flat and smooth side up, holding it so that the upper part
will present a somewhat convex surface, and commence larding at either
end and finishing at the other, in this way:

Run the needle through the upper part of the convex surface, commencing
at about a quarter of an inch from the edge of one side, running through
the meat a distance of about one inch and a half, about half an inch in
depth at the middle, and the strip of salt pork sticking out at both
ends; that is, where the needle was introduced into the meat, and where
it came out of it. Repeat this till you have a row of strips across the
meat, the strips being about one-third of an inch apart.

Lard row after row in the same way, and till the whole flat side is
covered; the ends of the strips of pork sticking out of each row being
intermingled.

_To cook it._--It may be roasted or baked exactly in the same way as
directed above for roast and baked beef. It may also be improved in the
same way.

When cooked in either of the two above ways, it is served with its gravy
only, or--
  With fried potatoes.
  With potato coquettes.
  With truffles.
  With tomatoes.
  With quenelles.
  With Madeira-sauce.
  With green peas.

The same as roast or baked beef above. It may also be decorated in the
same way.

A fillet is also cooked exactly like beef _a la mode_, with the
exception that it does not require as long; for a large one, it requires
only about three hours.

When cooked thus, it is served with its gravy strained, and decorated
with skewers, as above.

_With Macaroni._--While the fillet is cooking, prepare a pound of
macaroni au jus, and serve the fillet on the macaroni spread on a dish;
the gravy of the fillet being mixed with the macaroni when both are
done.

_Fillet a la Brillat-Savarin._--Cook it in a pan as above, and serve it
decorated with sweetbreads and slices of truffles, as described for
roast-beef, and with a Champagne-sauce.

_A la Chateaubriand._--This is prepared and served like the preceding
one, with a _Madeira_ instead of a _Champagne_ sauce.

_Saute._--When cooked in a pan as directed above, cook mushrooms about
ten minutes in the gravy, and serve mushrooms and gravy all around the
meat.

A fillet _saute_ is always made with a tenderloin.

As is seen by the above receipts, all the good pieces of beef may be
prepared in the ways described, ribs as well as other pieces, and from
the plainest to the most _recherche_ way, from the cheapest to the most
costly manner.

Several names are given to the different ways we have described, such as
fillet _financiere_ (fillet served with a ragout of chicken-combs),
fillet Richelieu (fillet with half a dozen skewers), etc.

_En Bellevue._--This is the best way to serve it cold. It may be served
whole, or part of it, that is, what is left from the preceding dinner.
For a supper or lunch, it is the most handy dish, as it can be prepared
in advance. Make some meat jelly or calf's-foot jelly, put a thickness
of about three-quarters of an inch of it in a tin dish or mould, large
enough to hold the fillet; then place on ice to cool, and when congealed
and firm enough, place the fillet on it, the larded side downward; fill
now with jelly till the fillet is covered, and have a thickness of about
three-quarters of an inch above it.

The fillet must not touch the sides of the mould, but be perfectly
enveloped in jelly. If the thickness of jelly is even on both sides and
all around, it is much more sightly. When the jelly is perfectly
congealed and firm, place a dish over the mould, turn upside down, and
remove it. Serve as it is.

As a tenderloin is very expensive and rather difficult to get, buy a
fine piece of ribs, cut the fleshy part of the shape of a tenderloin,
and prepare it as directed above; it makes an excellent and sightly
dish. The bony part with the rest of the flesh is used to make broth.


  RIBS.

_With Vinegar._--Put two tablespoonfuls of fat in a saucepan, and set it
on the fire; when melted, put the beef in; say a piece of three pounds,
from the round, rump, or rib-piece; brown it on every side; add one gill
of vinegar, salt, and a teaspoonful of pepper, cover the pan, and keep
on a rather sharp fire for fifteen minutes; then add one carrot and one
onion, both sliced, a stalk of thyme, three cloves, two bay-leaves, and
six pepper-corns, a pint of broth, and same of water; boil gently till
done; dish the meat, strain the sauce over it, and serve.

Ribs may also be broiled like steaks, and served either with a _maitre
d'hotel_, mushrooms, potatoes, or water-cress. The low cuts of beef are
generally used to make broth, or stewed.


  STEAKS.

The best piece of beef for a steak is the tenderloin.

What is called a porter-house steak is the tenderloin, sirloin, and
other surrounding parts cut in slices.

A steak should never be less than three-quarters of an inch in
thickness.

It should always be broiled; it is inferior in taste and flavor when
cooked in a pan (_saute_), or other utensil, but many persons cook it
so, not having the necessary fire or utensil to broil; broiled or
_saute_, it is served alike.

The same rules are applied to steaks of venison, pork, etc.;
turtle-steaks are also prepared like beef-steaks.

A good steak does not need any pounding; the object of pounding a steak
is to break its fibres. A pounded steak may appear or taste more tender
to a person not knowing or never having tasted a good steak, but an
experienced palate cannot be deceived.

It is better to broil before than over the fire. (_See_ Broiling.)

To cook a steak in an oven or drum, or any other badly-invented machine
or contrivance, is not to broil it, but to spoil it.

_To make tender._--When cut, trimmed, salted, and peppered, put them in
a bowl, and sprinkle some sweet-oil or melted butter over them; turn
them over in the bowl every two or three hours for from six to twelve
hours.

_To cut and prepare._--Cut the meat in round or oval slices, as even as
possible, of any size, about one inch in thickness, and trim off the
fibres and thin skin that may be around. Do not cut off the fat, but
flatten a little each slice with a chopper.

_To broil._--when the steaks are cut and prepared as directed, they are
slightly greased on both sides with lard or butter (if they have not
been in a bowl with oil or butter before cooking them), placed on a
warmed gridiron, set before or on a sharp fire, turned over once or
twice, and taken off when rather underdone. Salt and pepper them, dish,
spread a _maitre d'hotel_ over them, and serve very warm.

Cooks and epicures differ about the turning over of steaks; also about
broiling them with or without salt; some say that they must not be
turned over twice, others are of opinion that they must be turned over
two or three, and even more times; some say that they must be salted and
peppered before broiling, others say they must not; we have tried the
two ways many times, and did not find any difference; if there is any
difference at all, it is in the quality of the meat, or in the person's
taste, or in the cook's care.

When the steak is served as above, place some fried potatoes all around,
and serve hot. Instead of fried potatoes, put some water-cress all
around, add a few drops of vinegar, and serve. The water-cress is to be
put on raw and cold.

When the steak is dished, spread some anchovy-butter on it instead of a
_maitre d'hotel_, and serve warm also. It may also be served with
lobster-butter instead of a _maitre d'hotel_. Steaks are also served
with horse-radish butter, and surrounded with fried or _souffle_
potatoes.

_With a Tomato-Sauce._--Broil and serve the steak as directed above, and
serve it with a tomato-sauce instead of a _maitre d'hotel_.

_With a Poivrade or Piquante Sauce._--Broil and serve with a _poivrade_
or _piquante_ sauce, instead of a _maitre d'hotel_.

_With Egg._--When the steaks are cut and prepared as directed, dip them
in beaten egg, roll them in bread-crumbs, then broil, and serve them
with either a _maitre d'hotel_ or tomato-sauce, or with potatoes, etc.

_With Truffles._--Set a saucepan on the fire with one ounce of butter in
it; as soon as melted add half a tablespoonful of flour, stir, and, when
turning brown, add also about a gill of broth; stir again for five or
six minutes, when mix three or four tablespoonfuls of good gravy with
the rest; boil gently ten minutes, take from the fire; slice two or
three truffles, mix them with the rest; add salt and pepper to taste;
give one boil, turn over the steak which you have broiled as directed,
and serve.

_With Mushrooms._--Proceed as for truffles in every particular, except
that you use mushrooms.

_Fancy Steak._--Cut the steak two or three inches thick, butter slightly
both sides, lay it on a gridiron well greased and warmed; set it on a
moderate fire and broil it well; to cook it through it must be turned
over many times, on account of its thickness. Serve like another steak,
with a _maitre d'hotel_, _poivrade_, potatoes, or water-cress, etc.


  BOILED BEEF.

This is understood to be beef that has been used to make broth--a
rump-piece or a rib-piece, boned and tied with twine before cooking it.

[Illustration: _a,_ skewer; _b,_ carrot; _c,_ turnip; _d,_ beef; _e,_
carrots and turnips.]

_With Carrots and Turnips._--Remove the twine, and place the piece of
beef on the middle of a dish, with carrots and turnips, cut with a
fruit-corer, prepared _au jus_ or glazed, and arranged all around it;
also, some skewers run through pieces of carrot and turnip, and then
stuck in the piece of beef. (See cut p. 174.) Serve warm.

_With Brussels Cabbage, or Sprouts._--Serve the beef as above,
surrounded with sprouts _au jus_, and also ornamented with skewers run
through sprouts, with a piece of turnip between each.

_In Bourgeoise._--Serve the piece of beef warm, decorated if handy, and
surrounded with fried potatoes cut with a vegetable spoon or in fillets,
and gravy spread over the whole.

If not decorated, a few sprigs of parsley may be spread on the beef.

_With Onions._--Serve the beef as above, and surround it with glazed
onions.

_With Celery._--When served as above, the meat is surrounded with a
_puree_ of celery.

_With Cauliflowers._--Serve warm, with a garniture of cauliflowers all
around. It may be decorated with skewers.

_With Chestnuts._--Glaze chestnuts as for dessert; run the skewers
through a chestnut first, then through a fried potato, and then through
a slice of carrot, and stick one at each end of the piece of beef; put
chestnuts all around, spread some gravy over the whole, and serve warm.

_In Croquettes._--Proceed as for _croquettes_ of chicken.

_Hollandaise._--Cut the meat in fillets and put it in a saucepan, with
about two ounces of fat or butter to a pound of meat; set on the fire
and stir for ten minutes. Then add a tablespoonful of flour and stir
about one minute, with warm water enough to half cover the meat, and
boil about five minutes, stirring now and then.

Mix together in a bowl two yolks of eggs, the juice of half a lemon, and
two or three tablespoonfuls of the sauce from the saucepan in which the
beef is; turn the mixture into the saucepan, stir and mix, add salt and
pepper to taste, give one boil, and serve warm.

_Broiled._--Cut the meat in slices about one inch in thickness, broil,
and serve like steaks.

_Au Gratin._--Put two ounces of butter in a saucepan on the fire, and
when melted sprinkle into it two tablespoonfuls of bread-crumbs, two or
three mushrooms chopped, a teaspoonful of chopped onions, same of
parsley, a pinch of allspice, salt, and pepper; stir for about two
minutes, add a little broth to make the whole rather liquid. Cut one
pound of boiled beef in slices, place them in a tin or silver dish, turn
the mixture over them, dust with bread-crumbs; put half a dozen pieces
of butter here and there on the top, and bake for about fifteen minutes.

Take from the oven when done, add a few drops of lemon juice all over,
and serve warm in the dish in which it was baked.

With a _maitre d'hotel_, _piquante_, _Mayonnaise_, _Robert_, _ravigote_,
_Tartar_, or _tomato_ sauce.

Cut it in slices, place them on a dish, spread on them some chopped
parsley and slices of pickled cucumbers, and send thus to the table,
with either of the above sauces in a saucer to be used with it.


  IN MIROTON.

Put a piece of butter the size of an egg in a stewpan (this is for about
two pounds), and set it on the fire; when melted, put in it four
middling-sized onions, cut in slices when nearly cooked, sprinkle on
them a pinch of flour, and stir till it takes a golden color; then add
half a glass of white wine, and as much of broth, also salt, pepper, and
a little grated nutmeg; boil until well cooked, and till the sauce is
reduced; then add the boiled beef, cut in slices, and leave it fifteen
minutes; dish it, pour on a few drops of vinegar, and serve.

_Hushed._--Proceed exactly as for _miroton_, except that the beef is cut
in strips or chopped, and that no wine is used.


  IN SALAD.

Cut it in very thin and short slices, and place them on a dish with
chopped parsley; put in a saucer sweet-oil and vinegar, according to the
quantity of beef you have, two tablespoonfuls of oil to one of vinegar,
salt, pepper, and some mustard; beat the whole a little, pour on the
slices, and serve.


  CORNED BEEF.

Corned beef is generally boiled. Soak the corned beef in cold water for
some time, according to how salt it is.

Set it on the fire, covered with cold water, and boil gently till done.

_With Cabbage._--Blanch the cabbage for about five minutes, and drain.
Then put it to cook with the corned beef when the latter is about half
done; serve both on the same dish, or separately, according to taste.

Corned beef, when boiled as above, without cabbage, can be served and
decorated, in every way, like boiled beef. It certainly makes sightly as
well as good dishes for a family dinner.

A piece of corned beef, surrounded with a garniture as we have
described above, decorated with skewers, is very often served as a
_releve_ at an extra dinner.

_Cold Corned Beef._--A whole piece, or part of it, may be served _en
Bellevue_, the same as a _fillet en Bellevue_; it is also excellent.


  TONGUE.

Clean and blanch it for about ten minutes--till the white skin can be
easily removed. After ten minutes boiling, try if it comes off; if not,
boil a little longer, then skin it well.

_To boil._--When skinned, put it in your soup-kettle with the beef,
etc., to make broth, and leave it till done. When boiled, the tongue may
be served and decorated exactly the same as boiled beef, in every way.

_Stewed._--Cut square fillets of bacon, which dredge in a mixture of
chopped parsley, cives, salt, pepper, and a little allspice; lard the
tongue with the fillets. Put in a crockery stewpan two ounces of bacon
cut in dice, four sprigs of parsley, two of thyme, one of sweet basil,
two bay-leaves, a clove of garlic, two cloves, two carrots cut in
pieces, four small onions, salt, and pepper; lay the tongue on the
whole, wet with half a glass of white wine and a glass of broth; set on
a moderate fire, and simmer about five hours--keep it well covered; then
put the tongue on a dish, strain the sauce on it, and serve. It is a
delicious dish.

It may also be served with vegetables around, or with tomato-sauce.

_Another way._--When prepared as above directed, put it on the fire with
the same seasonings as the preceding one; simmer four hours and take
from the fire; put the tongue on a dish and let it cool, then place it
on the spit before a good fire, and finish the cooking; serve it warm
with an oil, or _piquante_ sauce.

If any is left of either of the two, put in a pan the next day, wet with
a little broth, set on the fire, and when warm serve it on a _puree_; do
not allow it to boil.


  BRAIN.

Soak it in lukewarm water and clean well, so as to have it free from
blood, fibres, and thin skin; then soak it again in cold water for
twelve hours in winter and six in summer. Put in a crockery stewpan one
ounce of bacon cut in slices, one carrot cut in pieces, two sprigs of
parsley, one of thyme, a bay-leaf, a clove, four small onions cut in
slices, a teaspoonful of chopped cives, salt, pepper, a pint of white
wine, as much of broth, and then the brain; set on a moderate fire for
half an hour and take it off; dish the brain and place it in a warm
place; then strain the sauce, put it back on the fire with the brain in
it, add two or three mushrooms cut in pieces, leave on the fire from ten
to fifteen minutes, and serve it, parted in two, with fried parsley
around.

_Another way._--When the brain is cleaned and prepared as above, cut it
in eight pieces. Mix well together a little flour, chopped parsley and
cives, also a pinch of allspice; roll the pieces of brain in it, so as
to allow the mixture to adhere to them; have some butter in a frying-pan
on the fire, and when hot put the pieces of brain in it; fry gently, and
serve with fried parsley around.


  HEART.

Soak it in lukewarm water for two hours, free it from blood and skin,
drain and wipe dry; then stuff it with sausage-meat, to which you have
added three or four onions chopped fine, put it in a rather quick oven,
or on the spit before a good fire (if on the spit, envelop it with
buttered paper), basting from time to time; it takes about an hour and a
half to cook a middling-sized one; serve it with a _vinaigrette_,
_piquante_, _poivrade_, or _ravigote_ sauce.

It may also be fried with butter, and cut in slices, but it is not as
good as in the above way; it generally becomes hard in frying.


  KIDNEYS.

First split the kidneys in four pieces, trim off as carefully as
possible the sinews and fat that are inside, then cut in small pieces.

_Saute._--The quicker this is done the better the kidney. For a whole
one put about two ounces of butter in a frying-pan and set it on a very
sharp fire, toss it round so as to melt the butter as fast as possible,
but without allowing it to blacken; as soon as melted, turn the cut
kidney in, stir now and then with a wooden spoon for about three
minutes, then add a tablespoonful of flour, stir again the same as
before for about one minute, when add a gill of white wine and about one
of broth; stir again now and then till the kidney is rather underdone,
and serve immediately.

If the kidney is allowed to boil till perfectly done, it will very
seldom be tender.

It may be done with water instead of wine and broth; in that case, add a
few drops of lemon-juice just before serving it.

Prepare and serve it also as calf's-kidney, in every way as directed for
the same.


  LIVER.

Cut the liver in slices a quarter of an inch in thickness, sprinkle on
them salt and pepper, place them on a gridiron, and set on a sharp
fire; turn over only once, and serve rather underdone, with butter and
chopped parsley, kneaded together and spread between the slices.

A few drops of lemon-juice may be added.

_Another way._--When the liver is cut in slices, as above, put a piece
of butter in a frying-pan on the fire, and when melted, lay the slices
in; turn over only once, then serve, with salt, pepper, vinegar, and
chopped parsley.


  TAIL.

Cut the tail at the joint, so as to make as many pieces as there are
joints; throw the pieces in boiling water for fifteen minutes, and drain
them. When cold and dry, put them in a saucepan with a bay-leaf, two
onions, with a clove stuck in each, two sprigs of parsley, and one of
thyme, a clove of garlic, salt, pepper, half a wine-glass of white wine,
and a few thin slices of salt pork; cover with broth or water, and set
on a moderate fire for two hours. Dish the pieces, strain the sauce on
them, and serve with a garniture of cabbage, or with any _puree_.


  TRIPE.

_How to clean and prepare._--Scrape and wash it well several times in
boiling water, changing the water every time, then put in very cold
water for about twelve hours, changing the water two or three times;
place it in a pan, cover it with cold water; season with parsley, cives,
onions, one or two cloves of garlic, cloves, salt, and pepper; boil
gently five hours, take out and drain.

In case the water should boil away, add more.

You may save all the trouble of cleaning and preparing, by buying it
ready prepared, as it is generally sold in cities.

_Broiled._--When prepared, dip it in lukewarm butter, roll in
bread-crumbs, place on a gridiron, and set it on a moderate fire; turn
over as many times as is necessary to broil it well, and serve with a
_vinaigrette_, _piquante_, or Tartar sauce; also with a tomato-sauce.

_Stewed._--Put in a stewpan two ounces of salt pork, cut in dice, three
carrots cut in slices, eight small onions, four cloves, two bay-leaves,
two cloves of garlic, a piece of nutmeg, four sprigs of parsley, two of
thyme, a dozen stalks of cives, six pepper-corns, the fourth part of an
ox-foot cut in four pieces, salt, pepper, about two ounces of ham cut in
dice, then three pounds of double tripe on the whole; spread two ounces
of fat bacon cut in thin slices on the top; wet with half white wine and
half water, or water only if you choose; put the cover on, and if not
air-tight, put some paste around; set in a slow oven for six hours, then
take the tripe out, strain the sauce, skim off the fat when cool, then
put the sauce and tripe again in your pan, warm well, and serve in
crockery plates or bowls placed on chafing-dishes, as it is necessary to
keep it warm while eating. It is good with water only, but better with
half wine. This is also called _a la mode de Caen_.

_In Poulette._--When cleaned and prepared as directed, cut one pound of
tripe in strips about one and a half inches broad, then cut again
contrariwise, so as to make small fillets. Put one ounce of butter in a
saucepan with half a tablespoonful of flour, and mix cold; add two gills
of water, mix again, set on the fire, stir now and then, give one boil,
put the tripe in, salt and pepper to taste; boil two minutes and dish
the whole; put a teaspoonful of chopped parsley all over, and serve hot.

_Aux Fines Herbes._--Broil the tripe, and serve it with sauce _fines
herbes_.

Tripe may be bought pickled; it is then served at breakfast and lunch.


  SMOKED BEEF'S TONGUE.

Soak the smoked tongue in cold water for at least three hours, change
the water once or twice during the process. Then take off the thin skin
or strip around if there is any; put the tongue in a saucepan with two
sprigs of thyme, two of parsley, a bay-leaf, two cloves, six small
onions, and a clove of garlic; fill the pan with cold water, and let
simmer about six hours. If the water is boiling away, add more. Take
from the fire, let cool as it is, then take it out of the water; clean
it, let dry, and serve it when cold.

Cut the tongue, when prepared as above, either in slices or in strips,
and use for sandwiches, or serve it whole, with a cucumber, _piquante_,
_poivrade_, or tomato sauce, at breakfast or lunch. It may also be
served in _vinaigrette_.

When prepared as directed above, serve it as a fillet of beef _en
Bellevue_, for supper, lunch, or breakfast. It makes a fine and
delicious dish.

It is used also to stuff boned turkeys and other birds, as directed in
those receipts; always boil it as directed above, before using it.

When served with any of the above sauces, it may be decorated with
skewers the same as boiled beef.

_Larded._--When boiled, lard it with salt pork, and bake it for about
one hour in a moderately heated oven, and serve it with the same sauces
as above.

Cut in slices and served with parsley, it is a _hors-d'oeuvre_.




  MUTTON.

  HOW TO SELECT.


You may be sure that mutton is good when the flesh is rather black, and
the fat white; if the fat breaks easily, it is young.

The wether is much superior to the ewe.

You will know if a leg of mutton comes from a wether, if there is a
large and hard piece of fat on one side at the larger and upper end; if
from a ewe, that part is merely a kind of skin, with a little fat on it.


  ROASTED.

A piece of mutton to roast must not be too fresh, it is much more tender
when the meat is rather seasoned, but not tainted, or what is sometimes
called "high." When on the spit, place it near the fire, baste
immediately with a little melted butter, and then with the drippings. As
soon as you notice that a kind of crust or coating has formed around the
piece of meat, remove it a little from the fire by degrees; and continue
basting till done. The quicker the crust is formed, though without
burning the meat, the more juicy and tender it will be.

Roast mutton, like roast beef, is better served rather underdone, but
should be a little more done than beef. When properly roasted, the meat,
whatever piece it may be, either a loin or saddle, a leg, shoulder, or
a breast, may be served with its gravy only; that is, with what is in
the dripping-pan after having removed all the fat, also on a _soubise_
or on a _puree_ of sorrel. The above pieces may also be served in the
following ways:

_With Potatoes._--When dished, surround the meat with potatoes, either
fried, mashed, or in _croquettes_.

_With Quenelles._--Dish the meat, place half a dozen _quenelles_ around
it, and decorate it with skewers which you have run through a _quenelle_
and then through a craw-fish and stuck in the meat.

_With Carrots._--When dished, put all around the meat carrots _au jus_,
or glazed and cut with a vegetable spoon.

_With Spinach._--Spinach _au jus_ when done is spread on the dish, the
meat is put on it, and served warm. Do the same with a _puree_ of
cauliflowers.


  BAKED.

All the above pieces are baked as well as roasted; and when done, served
exactly in the same and every way as when roasted.

Put the meat in a baking-pan with a little butter spread over it; cover
the bottom of the pan with cold water, then put in a quick oven. After
it has been in the oven for about fifteen minutes, baste and place a
piece of buttered paper on the top of the meat. If the bottom of the pan
is getting dry, add a little more water, but it is seldom the case
except with inferior meat. When you see rather too much fat in the pan,
take from the oven, turn the fat off, put cold water instead, and put
back in the oven to finish the cooking. If the paper burns, put on
another piece; but by basting often over the paper, it will remain
pretty long before burning.

With a small knife or a skewer you ascertain when done enough or to your
liking; never cook by guess or by hearsay; the oven may be quicker one
day than another, or slower; the meat may be more tender, or more hard;
remember that if you cook by guess (we mean, to put down, as a matter of
course, that it takes so many hours, or so many minutes, to bake this or
that), and stick to it, you will fail nine times out of ten. When done,
serve as directed above.

_In Croquettes._--Make and serve as chicken _croquettes_.

_In Haricot or Ragout._--Take a neck or breast piece of mutton, which
cut in pieces about two inches long and one broad. Put them in a
saucepan (say three pounds) with two ounces of butter, set on the fire
and stir occasionally till turning rather brown, then add a
tablespoonful of flour, stir for one minute, cover with cold water, add
one onion whole, salt, a bunch of seasonings composed of four sprigs of
parsley, one of thyme, a bay-leaf, and a clove, one clove of garlic,
chopped fine. Boil gently till about two-thirds done, stirring now and
then; add potatoes, peeled, quartered, and cut, as far as possible, of
the shape of a carpel of orange. The proportion is, about as many pieces
of potatoes as of meat. Boil again gently till done, place the pieces of
meat in the middle of the dish, the potatoes around, the juice or sauce
over the whole, and serve. Skim off the fat, if any, before turning the
sauce over the rest.


  BREAST BOILED.

Put the breast entire in a saucepan, with a sprig of thyme, two of
parsley, a bay-leaf, a clove, salt, and pepper, cover with water, set
on the fire, boil gently till cooked, and then drain. Put in a
frying-pan three tablespoonfuls of sweet-oil, a teaspoonful of chopped
parsley, salt, and pepper; when hot lay the breast in and fry it all
around for five minutes; then take it off, roll it in bread-crumbs,
place it on a gridiron, and set on a good fire for five minutes; turn it
over once only, then serve it with a _piquante_, _poivrade_, or tomato
sauce. It may also be served on a _puree_ of sorrel.


  NECK BROILED.

Prepare and serve exactly the same as a breast broiled.

A breast or a neck piece broiled may be served on a _soubise_. It may
also be served with a _maitre d'hotel_ or mushroom sauce, also with a
_piquante_ or any other sharp sauce.


  CHOPS.

_Broiled._--Trim and flatten the chops with a chopper, sprinkle salt and
pepper on both sides, dip them in melted butter, place them on a
gridiron, and set on a sharp fire, turn over two or three times to broil
properly, and when done, serve them around a dish, one lapping over the
other, etc., and serve with the gravy. It takes about twelve minutes to
cook with a good fire.

_Another way._--When trimmed and flattened, dip them in beaten egg, roll
them in bread-crumbs and broil, either as they are, or enveloped in
buttered paper, and serve them with a _maitre d'hotel_ sauce.

_Sautes._--When trimmed and flattened, fry them with a little butter on
both sides; then take the chops from the pan and put them in a warm
place. Leave in the pan only a tablespoonful of fat, add to it three
times as much broth, a teaspoonful of parsley and green onions, two
shallots, two pickled cucumbers, all chopped fine, and a pinch of
allspice; give one boil, pour the whole on the chops, also the juice of
half a lemon, and serve.

_The same, with Vegetables._--Put in a frying-pan a piece of butter the
size of two walnuts for four chops, set on a good fire, and when hot lay
the chops in, after having flattened them with a chopper, and having
sprinkled salt and pepper on both sides; add a clove, and a teaspoonful
of chopped parsley and green onions; leave thus five minutes, turn over
once or twice; then add also half a wine-glass of broth, same of white
wine, and finish the cooking. Take the chops off the pan and put them in
a warm place. Boil the sauce in the pan ten minutes, turn it on the
chops, put a garniture of vegetables around, and serve. Throw away the
clove just before serving.

_Another way._--Have a piece of butter the size of an egg for eight
chops in a crockery vessel, and set it on a good fire; when melted take
from the fire, lay the chops in, after having flattened them; then cover
them with a sheet of buttered paper; place the vessel in a rather hot
oven, and when cooked serve them on a _maitre d'hotel_, _provencale_, or
tomato sauce. They may also be served on a _puree_ of sorrel, or one of
potatoes.

_The same, in Papillote._--Cut the chops rather thin, beat them gently
and flatten them; then proceed as for veal cutlets in _papillotes_ in
every particular.

_Financiere._--Broil the chops, either with or without egg and crumbs,
and serve them with a _financiere_ garniture.

_Soubise._--The chops are either broiled or fried; either broiled only
dipped in lukewarm butter or in beaten egg and crumbs and then served on
a _soubise_. A little lemon-juice may be added when they are on the
dish.

_Jardiniere._--Cut two carrots and two turnips with a vegetable spoon
and set on the fire with cold water and salt; boil gently till tender,
and drain. Boil also in the same way, in another pan and till tender,
two tablespoonfuls of green peas, or string-beans cut in pieces, and
drain also. Then put carrots, turnips, peas, or beans, back on the fire,
in the same pan with a little gravy and broth, enough to cover them,
salt, and pepper; boil gently five minutes; then put the chops in after
being fried as directed below; boil another five minutes; take from the
fire, place the chops around the dish, one lapping over the other, and
so that an empty place is left in the middle; turn the carrots, turnips,
and peas, with the sauce in that empty place, and serve. Salt and pepper
the chops on both sides; fry them in a little butter till about
three-quarters done; then take off and put with the vegetables as
directed above. They may be broiled instead of fried, which is better.

_A la Princesse._--Trim the chops as usual and salt and pepper both
sides. Chop very fine a piece of lean veal about half a pound for six or
eight chops, according to size, then pound it and mix it with half a
teaspoonful of flour, a pinch of nutmeg, salt, pepper, a yolk of egg,
two tablespoonfuls of bread-crumbs and one ounce of butter. If too firm
the butter must be melted so as to mix better. Put the mixture in a
saucepan, set on a good fire, stir for ten minutes, and take off. Then
grease the paste-board slightly with butter, put a teaspoonful of the
mixture here and there on it, roll and make small balls of it, drop them
in boiling broth or water, boiling about fifteen minutes, and take off
with a skimmer. Dip the chops in melted butter, then in beaten eggs, and
roll in bread-crumbs; fry them with a little butter. Fry the balls also.
Place the chops on the dish, the bones toward the edge, and the balls
between the chops; serve warm. A few balls may be placed in the middle.

_With Mushrooms._--Broil and serve them with a _puree_ of mushrooms, or
with a mushroom garniture.

Mutton chops, broiled, may be served with every kind of butter, every
garniture, and every sauce, according to taste; they may also be served
with every _puree_.

A French cook once said he could serve mutton _chops_ in three hundred
ways, _apples_ in two hundred ways, and _eggs_ in four hundred ways. The
culinary science and art is advanced enough to-day to double the above
figures, and have plenty to spare.


  LEG.

Besides being prepared as directed for roast mutton, a leg of mutton,
roasted or baked, may be served in the following ways:

Boil white beans and drain them as directed, then put them on the fire
with the drippings of the leg of mutton for ten minutes, stirring now
and then, and serve them with it. They may also be kept in the
dripping-pan for ten minutes, when boiled and drained, before the leg is
done. If the leg of mutton is baked, set them on the fire for about ten
minutes, with the gravy, stirring occasionally. Serve either on the same
or on a separate dish.

_With Currant Jelly._--Roast or bake the leg of mutton, and serve it
with currant jelly or with a _puree_.

_Provencale._--With a sharp-pointed knife, make a small cut in the leg
of mutton here and there, and large enough to stick into the cut a clove
of garlic. Make as many cuts as you please, from six to twenty,
according to taste, and in each cut stick a clove of garlic. When
prepared thus, roast or bake, and serve it with either of the following
sauces: _piquante_, _poivrade_, _ravigote_, _remolade_, Robert, shallot,
Tartar, tomato, and in _vinaigrette_.

_Decorated._--A leg of mutton may be decorated the same as a fillet of
beef.

_Stewed._--Take the large bone out, leaving the bone at the smaller end
as a handle; cut off also the bone below the knuckle, and fix it with
skewers; then put it in a stewpan with a pinch of allspice, four onions,
two cloves, two carrots cut in four pieces each, a small bunch of
parsley, two bay-leaves, three sprigs of thyme, salt, pepper, two ounces
of bacon cut in slices, a quarter of a pint of broth, and water enough
just to cover it; set on a good fire, and after one hour of boiling add
a liquor-glass of French brandy. Let simmer then for about five hours,
in all about six hours; then dish it, strain the sauce on it, and serve.

We would advise those who have never tasted of a leg of mutton cooked as
above, to try it.

It may be served also with white beans cooked in water and fried in
butter, or on fried potatoes.

_The next day._--If you have a piece left for the next day, cut it in
thin slices after dinner, place the slices on a dish, with parsley
under, in the middle, and above, and keep in a cold place.

A while before dinner you put in a stewpan a piece of butter (the
quantity to be according to the quantity of meat), and set it on a good
fire; when melted, sprinkle in, gradually, a little flour, stirring with
a wooden spoon; when of a proper thickness, and of a brownish color, add
a glass of broth, salt, pepper, a few pickled cucumbers cut in slices,
and two or three mushrooms; boil ten minutes; lay the slices of meat in,
subdue the fire, simmer twenty minutes, and serve.

_The same, in another way._--Chop fine the slices of leg of mutton, put
a piece of butter in a stewpan, and set it on the fire; when melted,
place the chopped meat in, keep stirring with a wooden spoon for about
ten minutes; then add two or three tablespoonfuls of broth, salt,
pepper, and a pinch of allspice; simmer fifteen minutes, and serve with
fried eggs all around the dish.

_Boiled._--Set a saucepan on the fire with cold water enough to cover
the leg of mutton, add salt; at the first boil put the leg of mutton in,
wrapped up in a towel. Boil gently till done. For a middling-sized one,
it takes about two hours. Remove the towel, dish the leg of mutton,
spread a caper-sauce over it, and serve hot. The sauce may also be
served in a boat or saucer.

_Cold._--What is left of it may be prepared like cold mutton in
vinaigrette.


  SHOULDER.

_Shoulder boned._--Split the shoulder just in the middle, on the inside,
lengthwise and following the middle of the bones; remove the flat bone
at the larger end first. This is easily done by scraping the meat off
the bone on both sides, and then pulling it off. Do the same with the
remaining bone. Spread the shoulder open on the table, the inside up,
salt and pepper it, then spread on it the same stuffing as for a chicken
stuffed with sausage-meat. Roll the shoulder round, tie it with twine,
and roast or bake it. When roasted or baked, serve with the gravy.

_On a Puree._--Bone and roll the shoulder as above directed, but do not
stuff it; roast or bake it, and serve it on a _puree_ of potatoes,
beans, peas, lentils, or any other vegetable; place the shoulder in the
middle of a dish, cut it in slices, and place them all around the
_puree_, one lapping over the other; turn the gravy over the whole
through a strainer, and serve hot.

_With a Sauce._--When baked or roasted as above, with or without
stuffing, serve it with a _piquante_, _ravigote_, or _Robert_ sauce.

_Boiled._--Boil, and serve it with a caper-sauce, the same as the leg.


  SADDLE.

Prepare, cook, and serve the saddle in the same way as the leg--roasted
or baked, warm or cold.


  COLD MUTTON.

_Served cold, a la Vinaigrette._--A shoulder of mutton, roasted or
baked, after being boned, makes a handsome dish served cold. Cut any
piece of cold mutton that you may have, in thin slices, as evenly as
possible. Place a paste-cutter, about an inch and a half in diameter, in
the middle of an oval dish; then place the slices of meat all around the
dish, one slice lapping over another; the dish being oval, the slices of
meat will touch the paste-cutter on two sides, but there will be two
empty places on the two other sides, which you fill with hard-boiled
white of egg chopped fine, and hard-boiled yolk of egg chopped fine
also; they must not be mixed, and the yolk must be farther from the
paste-cutter, the white touching it. Put a string of chopped yolk of egg
all around the meat, and outside of it one of chopped white of egg
around the yolk, and one of chopped parsley around the white. Remove the
paste-cutter, and put a rose, or two or three pinks, in its place, or a
small bunch of violets. Place one or three capers on each small heap of
yolk of egg that is on the middle of the dish, and also some capers here
and there on the string of white of egg.

Place a rose at each end of the dish, as indicated in the cut opposite;
six radishes around the dish, also as indicated in the cut, and you have
a dish as sightly as can be made, and an excellent one, too. Serve with
the following sauce in a boat or saucer: Put in a bowl half a
teaspoonful of mustard, a little pepper and salt; then pour one or two
tablespoonfuls of vinegar on, little by little, beating with a fork at
the same time; again, three or four tablespoonfuls of oil, and in the
same way; and when the whole is well mixed, serve.

[Illustration: A, two roses, one at each end; B, six radishes around; C,
slices of meat; D, eggs; E, yolks of eggs; F, parsley.]


  SHEEP'S BRAIN.

Prepare, cook, and serve as calf's brain.


  FEET.

_Broiled._--Throw them in boiling water for ten minutes, clean and
scrape off the hair and take out the large bone. Put in a saucepan a
bay-leaf, one clove, a tablespoonful of vinegar, a clove of garlic, two
sprigs of parsley, two green onions, salt, pepper, a piece of butter the
size of two walnuts, half a pint of broth, then a dozen feet on the
whole; set on a slow fire, simmer one hour, stir now and then, take from
the fire and let cool. Then dip each foot in beaten egg, and roll it in
bread-crumbs; place them on a gridiron; turn over to broil both sides
properly, and serve them with the sauce in which they have been cooked,
after having strained it. They may also be served on a _piquante_,
_poivrade_, _ravigote_, or _Robert_ sauce.

_In Poulette._--Prepare and clean them as directed above. Put in a
saucepan four ounces of salt pork cut in dice, two ounces of lard, salt,
and white pepper; when warm, add three sprigs of parsley, two of thyme,
a bay-leaf, one clove, four onions, and one carrot, cut in slices, a
quarter of a lemon, also cut in slices, free from rind and seed, two
tablespoonfuls of flour; this last must be added by sprinkling it little
by little, stirring the while with a wooden spoon; five minutes after,
place the feet in, cover the whole with warm water, and let simmer
gently for five or six hours. After that time see if the meat can be
easily detached from the bones, and if so, they are cooked; if not,
leave them a little longer, and take from the fire as soon as it is
easily detached, but do not detach it. Put in a stewpan a piece of
butter the size of two walnuts; when melted, sprinkle in it a
tablespoonful of flour, stir with a wooden spoon, then put the feet in,
add a teaspoonful of chopped parsley and green onions, a little piece of
nutmeg, salt, pepper, and two or three mushrooms cut in slices or
pieces; wet with broth; simmer half an hour, take from the fire, and
throw away the piece of nutmeg; mix with the whole two yolks of eggs
well beaten and a tablespoonful of vinegar, and serve.


  SHEEP'S KIDNEYS, BROILED.

Split them in two, and put them in cold water for five minutes; trim off
the pellicle or thin skin, run a skewer through, sprinkle salt and
pepper on, place them on the gridiron, and set on a good fire; turn
over, and when broiled, serve them with a piece of butter and chopped
parsley kneaded together, and placed on each kidney; add also a few
drops of lemon-juice.

You may also, when broiled, serve them on a _maitre d'hotel_ sauce.

_The same, in Brochette._--Proceed as above in every particular, except
that you place the kidneys on the spit instead of on the gridiron. Serve
them in the same way.

_The same, with Champagne._--Cut the kidneys in slices, each in ten or
twelve pieces. Put in a stewpan a piece of butter the size of two
walnuts, and set it on the fire; when melted, add a teaspoonful of
chopped parsley, same of mushrooms, a pinch of grated nutmeg, salt,
pepper, and the kidneys; keep tossing till they become stiff, then
sprinkle on them a saltspoonful of flour, stirring with a wooden spoon
the while; add also a wine-glass of Champagne, or of good white wine;
subdue the fire, and let simmer till cooked; take from the fire, add
about one ounce of fresh butter, and the juice of half a lemon, and
serve. This is a very delicate dish.


  SHEEP'S TAILS.

Put in a stewpan two ounces of bacon cut in slices, with a bay-leaf, two
sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, one clove, six small onions, one carrot
cut in four pieces, then about six tails; cover the whole with broth and
white wine, half of each; add salt and pepper. Place the pan in a
moderately heated oven; it will take about four hours to cook them.
After that time, take the tails from the pan, and put them in a warm
place, then strain the sauce in which they have cooked, skim off the fat
if too much of it, put the sauce back in the pan, and set on the fire;
let it reduce till rather thick, place the tails on a _puree_, turn the
sauce on them, and serve.


  SHEEP'S TONGUES.

Soak the tongues in cold water for two hours in winter, and one in
summer, and drain. Throw them in boiling water, and leave till you can
easily take the skin off; then skin and clean well, split in two
lengthwise, and let cool. Put in a stewpan two ounces of bacon cut in
thin slices, a bay-leaf, two sprigs of thyme, four of parsley, two
cloves, three green onions and six small red or white ones, one carrot
cut in four pieces, salt and pepper, then the tongues; add also half a
pint of broth, same of water, same of white wine; set in a moderately
heated oven, and simmer about four hours; have the stewpan covered as
nearly air-tight as possible. Then take the tongues from the pan and
drain them; knead well together two ounces of fresh butter, with two
teaspoonfuls of chopped parsley, a little salt and allspice; spread some
on each of the tongues as soon as they are cold; envelop each in oiled
paper, broil them gently on a slow fire, and serve with the paper.

You may also when prepared and cooked as above directed, and instead of
broiling them, place a _puree_ on a dish, and serve them on a _puree_,
pouring on the whole the sauce in which they have cooked, and straining
it at the same time.

They are really more delicate when broiled.


  LAMB.

_To select._--The flesh must be like that of mutton, rather black, and
the fat white.

There is no difference in the wether and ewe. The shorter the quarters
are the better the meat, and the fore as well as the hind quarter. With
the exception that the breast-piece is prepared also in _epigramme_, and
that it is cut in quarters instead of dividing it like mutton, lamb may
be prepared in the same and every way like mutton. The quarters may be
prepared like shoulder, leg, and saddle of mutton.

_Chops_ may be cut and prepared the same as mutton-chops.

_Fore-Quarter._--According to the opinion of a great many epicures, the
fore-quarter is the best part of the lamb; but, as we have previously
said, every one to his liking.

Lard it slightly, and envelop it with buttered paper, place it upon the
spit before a good fire; when done take from the fire, and take the
paper off, sprinkle on it salt, pepper, and chopped parsley; put back on
the spit before a sharp fire, just long enough to allow it to take a
fine color; then take off, run a knife under the shoulder to make a
small hole, pour _maitre d'hotel_ sauce in it, and serve either as it
is, with its gravy, or on a _puree_ of sorrel.

_To bake it._--Put it in a baking-pan, spread a little salt, pepper, and
butter over it; cover it with a piece of buttered paper; have the bottom
of the pan covered with cold water and put in a warm oven, baste often
till done. If the paper burns, put on another piece. Run a small knife
or a skewer into the meat, to ascertain when properly done.

It may be served with the gravy only, after having removed the fat, or
with a _piquante_, _poivrade_, or _maitre d'hotel_ sauce.

It is also served with a garniture of mushrooms or onions, or with a
_macedoine_, or on a _puree_ of spinach, or of sorrel.

_Hind-Quarter._--Throw it in boiling water for five minutes, and drain.
Put in a stewpan a piece of butter the size of an egg, and set on the
fire; when melted, mix in it a tablespoonful of flour; after which, pour
in, little by little, a pint and a half of boiling water, stirring with
a wooden spoon all the time; then put the meat in the pan, add four
onions, a bay-leaf, two cloves, three sprigs of parsley, two of thyme,
salt, and pepper; about fifteen minutes before it is done, add two or
three mushrooms cut in slices, take from the fire when cooked, place the
meat on a dish with the mushrooms and onions around, or if preferred,
without either; strain the sauce on the meat, and serve.

If the sauce is not thick enough, mix the yolk of an egg in it just
before serving.

_Roasted._--Roast and serve the hind-quarter in the same way as directed
for the fore-quarter.

_Baked._--Bake and serve it also in the same and every way like the
fore-quarter.

_Epigramme._--Put a breast of lamb in a saucepan, cover it with cold
water, season with a small onion and one clove stuck in it, two stalks
of parsley, a piece of carrot, one of turnip, and salt. Boil gently till
you can pull off the bones easily. It may also be boiled in the
soup-kettle while making broth. When the bones come off easily, take
from the fire, pull out all the small bones and cut out the large one.
Place the breast in a large bakepan, with some weight over so as to
flatten it, and leave it so till perfectly cold. Then cut it in pieces
of rhombic shape about four inches long and two inches broad; salt and
pepper each piece on both sides; dip them in beaten egg, roll in
bread-crumbs and fry them with a little butter, and serve on a tomato,
_piquante_, _ravigote_, or _soubise_ sauce, or on any _puree_.

When the sauce is spread on the dish, place the pieces of lamb all
around it, one lapping over the other, and forming a kind of oblong
string, and serve warm.

_Another._--When the _epigramme_ is prepared as above and ready to be
served, have as many mutton-chops as you have pieces of meat from the
breast; dish in the same way, except that you put one piece of the
breast and then a mutton-chop fried in the same way as the pieces of
meat; the chops lapping over the pieces of breast, and _vice versa_.

_Broiled._--The same may be broiled instead of fried, and served in the
same way.

_Roasted entire._--Skewer a lamb properly on the spit, envelop it with
buttered paper, place before a good fire, baste often with melted butter
first, and then with the drippings; when nearly done take the paper off,
let the lamb take a fine color around, and serve it with the gravy. It
may be served with a garniture around and decorated with skewers, the
same as directed for fillet of beef; it then makes a sightly as well as
a delicious dish.

Served with a garniture and decorated as directed for a fillet of beef,
it is served as a _releve_ at a grand dinner, and as an _entree_ at a
family dinner.

_Cold._--Cold lamb is served in every way like cold mutton. A part left
from a roasted piece may be enveloped in buttered paper, put on the spit
just long enough to warm it, and served just in the same way as roast
lamb.

_Lamb's head_, _feet_, _kidneys_, etc., are prepared and served like the
same parts of the sheep, and as directed in the different receipts.


  KID.

Prepare, cook, and serve kid the same as lamb.




  VEAL.


Never buy too young veal. It is very easy to know it; when too young,
the bones are very tender; they are more like nerves than bones; the
meat is gluish, and has little or no taste. Epicures say that if a calf
is killed before it is two months old, or at least six weeks, it is not
fit for eating. We are of that opinion, although, perhaps, very few are
allowed so long a life. We will therefore recommend our readers to
beware buying too young veal; many diseases, especially in children,
come from eating it.

When you broil or roast a piece of veal, baste often. Veal is better
when a little overdone; it is not good, and operates like physic, if
underdone.

The best veal is that of a greenish color and very fat. It is fresh when
the eyes are full and smooth, and when the meat is firm. If the meat is
yellowish or contains yellowish spots, it is not fresh. The veins must
be red.

_To improve._--Chop fine a tablespoonful of parsley, a teaspoonful of
shallots, same of green onions, a bay-leaf, two sprigs of thyme, two or
three mushrooms, add to them, salt, pepper, a little grated nutmeg;
cover the bottom of a tureen with half of each, put on it the piece of
veal you wish to improve, cover with the other half of the seasonings;
then pour gently on the whole two tablespoonfuls of sweet-oil; leave
the veal thus about four or five hours in winter and about two in
summer.


  ROASTED.

The pieces of veal that are roasted are the _loin_, _leg_, and
_shoulder_.

It may be improved as directed above or not, according to taste; but we
earnestly recommend it as not a little improvement, but as a marked one,
as everybody can try it and judge, veal being naturally tasteless.

There are three ways of roasting veal. We will describe them, so that it
can be done according to taste.

1. Spread a thin coat of butter around the piece of veal after being
salted all around, put on the spit before a good but not very sharp
fire; near it, but not too much so: veal being more tender than beef, it
would also burn much quicker. Baste often with melted butter first, and
then with the drippings, and from the beginning to the end. When done,
that is, when overdone, as veal must always be, serve with the gravy
only, or in the different ways described below.

2. Lard all the fleshy parts of the piece of veal with a larding-needle
and strips of salt pork, the same as a fillet of beef, but which strips
you roll in a mixture of parsley chopped, salt and pepper, before
running them into the meat, and proceed as above for the rest. Serve
also like the above.

3. After the piece of veal is improved as directed, spread the
seasonings in which it has been improved all around it, then envelop the
whole in buttered paper, which you fasten with twine, put it on the
spit, and baste often with melted butter. It must be basted often to
prevent the paper from burning. About fifteen minutes before it is
done, remove the paper, put the meat a little nearer the fire so as to
give it a fine yellow or golden color, finish the cooking till overdone,
and serve also like the first, or No. 1.

No matter which of these three ways the piece of veal is roasted, it is
served in the same manner.

_With Asparagus._--When the roasted piece of veal is dished, put a
_puree_ of asparagus all around, and serve warm.

_With Peas._--Spread one pint or one quart (according to the size of the
piece of meat) of green peas _au jus_, on a dish; place the meat on the
peas, spread the gravy over the whole, and serve as warm as possible.

_With Quenelles._--Dish the roasted piece, place around it six or eight
_quenelles_ of chicken or of veal, strain the gravy on the whole, and
serve warm.

_With Vegetables._--When roasted and dished, put any kind of vegetables,
prepared _au jus_, all around the piece of meat, and serve warm.

_With Sweetbreads._--Roast the piece of veal as directed, and when
dished, place six sweetbreads, prepared _au jus_, tastefully around the
meat; strain the gravy over, and serve very warm.

_Decorated._--Every piece of roasted veal may be decorated with skewers,
either served _au jus_ or in any of the above ways. The skewers are
first run through either of the following and then stuck into the piece
of meat: slices of truffles; chicken-combs, prepared as for garniture;
slices of sweetbreads or whole ones, prepared _au jus_; _quenelles_ of
chicken or of veal; slices of carrots, turnips, beets, all prepared _au
jus_; and mushrooms. One, two, three, or more to every skewer; for
instance: one slice of truffle, then one of turnip, a chicken-comb, then
a slice of sweetbread or a whole one, and then stick in the meat. From
two to six skewers may be used. On a large piece never put less than
two, and no matter how many you use, always have even numbers of them.


  BAKED.

All the parts of veal that are roasted, that is, the loin, leg, and
shoulder, can be baked. They may be improved in the same way as to roast
them. Put the piece of veal in a bakepan; spread salt, pepper, and
butter on it; cover the bottom of the pan with cold water, about a
quarter of an inch in depth; place a piece of buttered paper on the
meat, and put in a warm oven. If the meat has been improved, the
seasonings are spread over it before placing the buttered paper. Baste
often with the water and juice in the pan and over the paper, which you
need not remove till about ten minutes before taking from the oven, or
in case it should burn; then you must replace it by another. It keeps
the top of the meat moist, and it is more juicy when done.

When properly baked (overdone, as every piece of veal must be), serve
either _au jus_, or with the same garnitures, the same decorations, as
directed for roasted veal.

The gravy in the bakepan is strained, the fat skimmed off, and then it
is turned over the meat and garnitures when dished, the same as the
drippings or gravy of roast meat. In case the water in the bakepan, or
the juice, or both, should boil away or be absorbed, put more cold water
in it, so as to be able to baste.


  BLANQUETTE.--(_Also called Poulette._)

Take about two pounds of neck, breast, shoulder, or any other piece,
which cut in pieces, two inches square, throw them in boiling water,
with a little salt, for five minutes, and drain them. Put in a stewpan
a piece of butter the size of an egg, set it on a good fire, and when
melted mix in a tablespoonful of flour, stirring all the time, and when
turning yellow pour gently and slowly in the pan a pint of boiling
water; add a teaspoonful of chopped parsley and green onions, salt,
pepper, six small white or red onions, two or three mushrooms, and then
the meat; boil gently about three hours, and serve.


  CROQUETTES.

Proceed as for chicken croquettes in every particular, except that you
use cold veal instead of cold chicken.


  RAGOUT.

The neck and breast pieces are generally used to make a _ragout_, but
any other piece may be used. Take about three pounds of veal, which cut
in pieces about two inches square. Put two ounces of butter in a
saucepan, set it on the fire, and as soon as the butter is melted, lay
the meat in, stir now and then till of a golden color, and then take the
meat from the pan. Leave the pan on the fire, and put in it a
tablespoonful of flour, little by little, keep stirring about five
minutes; add also half a pint of broth, same of warm water, one onion
with a clove stuck in it, a bay leaf, two sprigs of thyme, two of
parsley, a clove of garlic, a small carrot cut in two or three pieces,
salt and pepper, then the meat, and cover the pan. Half an hour after
your meat is in, fry in butter in a frying-pan six small onions, which
you also put in the stewpan as soon as fried. When the whole is cooked,
place the meat on a dish, strain the sauce on it, surround the whole
with the six small onions, and serve warm.

_In Scallops._--Take a piece from the loin or leg of veal, cut it in
pieces about three inches long, two inches broad, and one-third of an
inch thick, as evenly as possible, and flatten them with a chopper. Salt
and pepper them on both sides, and fry them with a little butter till
about half done, on both sides alike. Add a little broth and chopped
parsley, and boil gently till done. Place the pieces of veal all around
the platter, one lapping over another, turn the sauce in the middle of
them, and serve.

_Another._--Cut the veal in pieces as for the above; beat one or two
eggs in a plate with salt, pepper, and chopped parsley; dip each piece
into it and then roll in bread-crumbs; butter a bakepan, place the veal
in with a small lump of butter on each piece, and bake; turn over to
bake evenly. Serve as the above, with a _piquante_ or tomato sauce in
the middle.


  BREAST, STEWED.

Cut in dice two ounces of bacon, put it in a stewpan and set on a good
fire; add two ounces of butter, and two onions cut in slices; when
melted, lay the breast in, turn it over and leave till of a golden color
on both sides; add then two small carrots cut in pieces, one teaspoonful
of chopped green onions, three sprigs of parsley, half a turnip, salt,
and pepper; moisten with half a pint of warm water; leave thus about
three hours on a moderate fire. Strain the juice in a dish, put the meat
on it, and serve.

The pieces of carrots and of bacon may be served with the meat, if you
choose.

_The same, with Green Peas._--Cut the breast in square pieces about two
inches in size. Put in a stewpan a piece of butter the size of an egg,
and set it on the fire; when melted, mix in it a teaspoonful of flour,
then lay the meat in, and wet with half a glass of broth, same of warm
water, also two sprigs of parsley, salt, and pepper; stir now and then.
One hour after add green peas, and leave on the fire till the whole is
cooked, when skim off the fat on the surface, and serve.

_In Matelote._--To make a _matelote_ of veal any piece can be used, but
most generally it is made with a breast or neck piece. Cut the veal in
square pieces about two inches in size; have in a stewpan and on a good
fire a piece of butter about the size of an egg; when melted, put the
meat in, stir now and then till of a golden color; then take the meat
from the stewpan, which you leave on the fire, and in which you put half
a pint of warm water, same of claret wine, same of broth, a bay-leaf,
two cloves, two sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, a clove of garlic,
salt, and pepper; when turning brown, put the meat back in the pan, and
fifteen minutes before it is cooked add also ten small onions fried in
butter beforehand and four or five mushrooms, then have a brisk fire to
finish the cooking; place the meat on a dish, strain the sauce on the
meat, put the ten small onions around it, and serve.

_Broiled._--Salt and pepper both sides of the breast of veal, grease it
all over with melted butter, by means of a brush, and broil till
overdone. Serve with a _maitre d'hotel_, _piquante_, or _poivrade_
sauce.


  CUTLETS.

_Broiled._--When properly trimmed, they may be improved as directed for
veal. Salt and pepper both sides; spread a little melted butter on both
sides also by means of a brush; place them on, before, or under the fire
(_see_ Broiling); baste now and then with melted butter; turn over one,
two, or three times, and when rather overdone serve with a _maitre
d'hotel_ sauce spread all over.

The above way of serving them is sometimes called _au naturel_.

_With Crumbs._--When trimmed, dip them in egg beaten with salt, pepper,
and chopped parsley, roll them in bread-crumbs, and then broil and serve
them as the above, with a _maitre d'hotel_.

_Fines Herbes._--Broil the chops as above, either with or without
crumbs, and serve them with sauce _aux fines herbes_.

_A l'Italienne._--When broiled as above, serve them on a layer of
_macaroni Italienne_.

_With Mushrooms._--When broiled and dished, surround them with a
garniture of mushrooms, and serve warm. When there are several cutlets
on the dish, and placed all around overlapping, the garniture may be put
in the middle of the chops.

Do the same with the following garnitures: chicken-combs, _croutons_,
_duxelle_, _financiere_, _Macedoine_, and onion. They may also be served
on any _puree_.

_Baked._--Trim six cutlets. Mix well half a pound of sausage-meat with
two eggs. Put a piece of buttered paper large enough to cover the bottom
of a bakepan in which the six cutlets may be laid easily. Spread half
the sausage-meat on the paper in the pan, then lay the cutlets in it;
put the other half of the sausage-meat over the cutlets, and place the
whole in a rather quick oven. Baste every five minutes with melted
butter and broth, using them alternately, and serve warm with the gravy
when done. A few drops of lemon-juice may be added to them when on the
dish, if liked.

_Sautees._--Trim, and fry them with a little butter. When done on both
sides, add a little broth, salt, pepper, and mushrooms and parsley
chopped fine; chopped truffles may be added, if handy; boil gently for
about ten minutes. Place the cutlets around the dish, one lapping over
the other, turn the sauce in the middle, sprinkle some lemon-juice over
the whole, and serve warm.

_With Sauce._--When broiled, baked, or _sauted_, they may be dished and
served with either of the following sauces: _fines herbes_, _maitre
d'hotel_, _piquante_, _poivrade_, _ravigote_, _tarragon_, tomato, or
truffle.

_En Bellevue._--Proceed the same as for fillet of beef _en Bellevue_.

_In Papillotes._--Trim six veal-chops, spread salt and pepper on them,
and fry them with a little butter till about half done. Take from the
fire, and cut a small hole in the middle with a paste-cutter. While they
are frying, fry with a little butter one onion chopped fine; as soon as
fried, add half a pound of sausage-meat; stir now and then for about
five minutes; add also a pinch of cinnamon, same of nutmeg; take off and
mix with the whole one yolk of egg, a tablespoonful of chopped parsley,
salt, and pepper. Cut six pieces of white paper of a heart-like shape,
and large enough to envelop a chop; grease them slightly with butter or
sweet-oil; place some sausage-meat on one side of the paper (say half a
tablespoonful), place a chop on it; put some sausage-meat on the chop
and in the hole; fold the paper in two; then, by folding all around the
border, the chop and seasonings are perfectly enveloped in the paper;
put the chops in a baking-pan, spread a few drops of oil all over, and
bake for about fifteen minutes in an oven at about 250 deg. Fahr.
Instead of baking them, broil them carefully turning them over often and
basting them to prevent the paper from burning, and serve with the paper
on. They may be served on a _duxelle_ garniture, or with a _puree_.

_Fricandeau._--Take a piece of veal of any size, from the leg, loin, or
cutlet piece, about three-quarters of an inch in thickness, lard one
side with salt pork, the same as a fillet of beef. Put in a saucepan
(for two pounds of meat) one ounce of butter, half a middling-sized
onion, and as much carrot in slices, two or three stalks of parsley, one
of thyme, a bay-leaf, six or eight pepper-corns, and rind of the pork
you have used; spread all these seasonings on the bottom of the
saucepan, put the piece of veal on them, the larded side up, set on a
good fire for about fifteen minutes; after which you look if the under
side of the meat is well browned; if so, add a gill of broth, put in the
oven and baste often, if not, leave a little longer on the fire. Add a
little broth once in a while, to keep the bottom of the pan wet, and to
have enough to baste till a little overdone, and serve with the gravy
strained all over it. It is then called _au jus_.

_With Spinach._--Prepare and cook the _fricandeau_ as above; and when
done, put some broth in the pan after having taken off the meat; give
one boil; turn in the spinach _au jus_; stir on the fire one minute;
dish the spinach; place the _fricandeau_ on it, and serve.

_With Sorrel._--Proceed as with spinach in every particular, except that
you serve on sorrel _au jus_ instead of spinach. It makes a more
delicate dish with sorrel, although excellent with spinach.

It may also be served with green peas _au jus_ or _a l'anglaise_.

_Financiere._--When prepared, cooked, and dished as directed, surround
it with a _financiere_ garniture, and serve warm.

_Jardiniere._--After being cooked and dished, put a _Macedoine_
garniture around it, and serve warm.


  SHOULDER.

_Boned._--Lay the shoulder on the table, the inside up, split it just in
the middle, lengthwise, and following the middle of the bones; remove
the flat bone at the larger end first. Do the same for the remaining
bone. Then spread the shoulder open, and salt and pepper it. Fill the
inside with sausage-meat; roll it of a round shape, and when properly
tied with twine, roast or bake it, as directed for roasted or baked
veal. It is then dished, decorated, and served in the same and every way
as directed for roasted pieces of veal.

It is an excellent dish served on either of the following purees:
_beans_, _celery_, _lentils_, _peas_, _potatoes_, _sorrel_, _spinach_,
or _tomatoes_.

When served on a _puree_, it may be decorated with skewers, the same as
when served with a garniture.

It may also be served with a _piquante_ or _poivrade_ sauce.

_Stuffed._--Bone the shoulder as directed above; spread it open, and
salt and pepper it, also as directed. Spread a coat of sausage-meat on
it, about one-third of an inch in thickness, then put a layer of salt
pork on the sausage-meat; then a layer of boiled ham; again a layer of
sausage-meat; on this a layer of beef or sheep's tongue, boiled. The ham
and tongue are cut in square fillets, about one-fourth of an inch broad
and about two inches long. The tongues may be fresh or salted, according
to taste. When filled, roll it so as to give it a round shape; wrap it
up in a towel and drop it in boiling water, to which you have added
salt. Boil gently for about four hours, take the kettle from the fire
and let cool. When cold take the shoulder off, wipe it dry and serve
with meat jelly. The jelly is chopped, or cut in fancy shapes, or both.
Some chopped jelly may be placed all around the meat, and some cut in
fancy shapes with a paste-cutter or with a knife, and placed over it.

It may also be decorated with skewers, as directed for roasted pieces of
veal.

_En Bellevue._--When boiled and cold, prepare it like a fillet of _beef
en Bellevue_, and serve.


  LOIN OR LEG STEWED.

Have in a stewpan and on a slow fire three or four tablespoonfuls of
sweet-oil; when hot put the loin in, turn it over till of a yellow color
all around, then add a bay-leaf, salt, pepper, and a pint of warm water;
simmer four hours, and serve with the following sauce, which you must
have prepared at the same time: Fry in butter till of a golden color ten
middling-sized onions, then add to them half a glass of claret wine, two
tablespoonfuls of broth, and two of the juice of the loin, ten mushrooms
(if handy); simmer till cooked, and strain. Mix the sauce with the juice
of the loin, and put it on a dish, place the loin upon it, and serve
with the onions and mushrooms around the meat.

In case the juice of the loin should be found too fat, throw in it (and
before mixing it with the sauce) a few drops of cold water, and skim off
the fat.

The only thing to throw away before mixing is the bay-leaf.

_Another way, or prepared with a Garniture of Cabbages._--Put in a
stewpan and set on a good fire a piece of butter the size of an egg;
when melted, add four onions and two small carrots, cut in slices; fry
them two or three minutes, then put the loin in, with half a bay-leaf,
wet with warm broth; then subdue the fire, let simmer about two hours
and a half; strain the sauce on a dish, place the meat on it, and serve
with a garniture of cabbages around.


  COLD VEAL.

Cut the meat in slices and serve them on a dish, arranged according to
fancy, and serve with a _piquante_, _poivrade_, _Mayonnaise_,
_Provencale_, _ravigote_, or _remolade_ sauce. It may also be decorated
and served like cold mutton, in _vinaigrette_.

_Another way._--Put a piece of butter the size of an egg in a stewpan
and set on a good fire, mix in when melted two teaspoonfuls of flour,
stir till of a brownish color, when add a saltspoonful of chopped
parsley, four leaves of tarragon, salt, pepper, and half a pint of broth
(more or less of the above according to the quantity of meat you have
left), boil the whole fifteen minutes; then, if what you have left is
from an entire piece, cut it in slices, lay them in the pan, and serve
when warm enough, as it is.

If what you have left is in pieces or slices, you merely place them in
the pan and serve with the sauce when warm.


  BRAIN.

_To prepare._--Put the brain in a bowl of cold water and a tablespoonful
of vinegar and leave it in from one to two or three hours, that is, till
you are ready to use it, but do not leave it more than five or six hours
and not less than one hour. Take it off, remove the thin skin and
blood-vessels that are all around.

_To boil._--When prepared, put the brain in a small saucepan, cover it
with cold water; add two tablespoonfuls of vinegar, half an onion
sliced, three stalks of parsley, one of thyme, a bay-leaf, six
pepper-corns, one clove, salt, boil about five minutes and take off the
fire. Cut each half of the brain in two, from side to side; place the
four pieces on a dish, the part cut upward.

_Au Beurre Noir._--When dished as above directed, put two ounces of
butter in a frying-pan and when melted turn into it two tablespoonfuls
of vinegar, boil two or three minutes, then throw into it half a dozen
stalks of parsley, take them off immediately with a skimmer, turn the
butter and vinegar over the brain; spread the parsley around, and serve.

_Stewed, or in Matelote._--When prepared as directed, put it in a small
saucepan and cover it with claret wine; add half an onion sliced, one
clove of garlic, one clove, two sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, salt, a
bay-leaf, six pepper-corns, and boil gently for about fifteen minutes.
Cut and dish it as directed above; turn the sauce over it through a
strainer and serve--it is understood, the sauce in which it has been
cooked.

_Fried._--Prepare as directed, cut in about six slices, dip them in
batter, and fry in hot fat. (_See direction for_ Frying.)

_In Poulette._--Prepare and boil it as directed, split each half of the
brain in two or four pieces, place them tastefully on a dish, spread a
_poulette_ sauce all over, and serve warm. It may also be prepared and
served with a _piquante_ sauce. When the _piquante_ sauce is made, put
the brain or brains in, boil ten minutes, and serve as it is.


  EARS.

They are prepared in every way like calf's head.


  FEET.

_To boil._--Throw them in boiling water for five minutes, split them in
the middle and lengthwise after having taken off the large bone and
hair, and tie them with a string. Put a piece of butter the size of two
walnuts in a stewpan and set it on the fire, when melted add a
teaspoonful of chopped parsley and green onions, half of each, a quarter
of a lemon cut in slices, salt, and pepper, then the feet; wet with a
glass of warm water; boil gently two or three hours, take from the fire
and when nearly cold dip them in bread-crumbs, place them on a gridiron
and set on a good fire, baste slightly with the juice in which they have
cooked, and serve with fried parsley around.

_The same, in Poulette._--Prepare and cook them as above. When you take
them from the fire, instead of dipping them in bread-crumbs, put them in
a _poulette_ sauce, simmer ten minutes, and serve.

_Fried._--When boiled and drained dry, dip them in beaten egg, roll in
bread-crumbs, fry in hot fat, and serve with green parsley all around.

_In Vinaigrette._--Boil them as directed and drain them dry. When
perfectly cold, serve them with a _vinaigrette_.


  CALF'S HEAD.

_How to prepare._--When the hair is off and the whole head well cleaned
(this is generally done by butchers; but if not, throw the head in
boiling water for five minutes and scrape the hair off with a knife
immediately after taking it from the water), put it then in cold water
for twenty-four hours in winter and ten in summer, changing the water
two or three times.

_To boil._--It may be boiled whole or after it is boned. If boiled
whole, cut a hole on the top of the head and take off the brain without
breaking it; put it in cold water immediately and as directed. Then set
the head on the fire in a saucepan, covered with cold water, salt, one
onion sliced, half a lemon, four stalks of parsley, one of thyme, a
bay-leaf, two cloves, two cloves of garlic, ten pepper-corns, and two
tablespoonfuls of vinegar; boil gently till done. Bone it before using
it.

When boiled after being boned, the brain is taken off in the same way as
above and put in cold water also; then the tongue is cut out and boiled
with the skin of the head, etc., with the same seasonings as when boiled
whole. It is then ready for use, but leave it in the water till wanted;
it would become tough if exposed to the air.

_In Poulette._--Put about two ounces of butter in a saucepan, set it on
the fire, when melted turn in one tablespoonful of flour; stir, and as
soon as it commences to turn yellow add half a pint of broth, stir
again, and when thickening, add the calf's head cut in rather large
dice, give one boil, take from the fire, add the yolk of an egg and
about a teaspoonful of chopped parsley, stir, give another boil, and
serve.

_In Vinaigrette._--Leave it in the water till perfectly cold; or, if
wanted immediately, as soon as boiled, take it off and put in cold water
to cool, and use. Cut the head in large dice and serve it with oil,
vinegar, salt, pepper, mustard, and parsley chopped.

_Broiled._--Prepare and boil the calf's head as directed. As soon as
cool, cut it in about half a dozen pieces, dip them in beaten eggs, roll
them in bread-crumbs, and broil both sides till turning of a golden
color; serve warm with a _maitre d'hotel_ sauce, or with anchovy or
horse-radish butter.

_Fried._--Calf's head may be fried as soon as prepared and boiled; but
most generally, it is only what has been left from the day before that
is fried. Cut it in small pieces about two inches square, dip them in
melted butter, roll them in bread-crumbs, and fry them in hot fat.
Serve hot, adding lemon-juice when the pieces of calf's head are on the
dish.

_En Tortue, or Turtle-like._--There are two ways of preparing calf's
head en tortue:

1. When it is prepared and boiled as directed above, drain it dry, cut
it in pieces as for frying it; put them in a saucepan with one ounce of
butter, set on the fire, stir for two minutes, add nearly a pint of
Madeira wine, simmer gently for about half an hour; dish the meat, add a
little lemon-juice all over, and serve warm. Some _quenelles_ of chicken
may be placed all around, as a decoration; or a garniture of mushrooms.

2. Prepare and boil the calf's head; drain it dry and cut it in pieces
about two inches square. Dish the pieces either mound-like, or around
the dish, one lapping over the other, and turn the following over it,
and serve warm: Put a _financiere_ garniture in a saucepan with a pint
of Madeira wine, set on the fire and boil gently for about twenty
minutes; take from the fire, spread over the pieces of calf's head, and
serve.

Some hard-boiled eggs cut in four or eight pieces, lengthwise, may be
placed all around the dish; or some pickled cucumbers, cut in fancy
pieces, or some quenelles of veal or chicken.


  HEART.

_To prepare._--Soak it in lukewarm water for about three hours, trim it
and free it from skin, blood, and small fibres; then drain and wipe it
dry. Stuff or fill it with sausage-meat, to which you add previously two
or three onions chopped fine.

_To cook._--When thus prepared, envelop it in buttered paper, set on
the spit before a good fire, baste often, remove the paper a few minutes
before taking it from the fire, then serve warm with a _piquante_,
_poivrade_, or _ravigote_ sauce. It may also be served with a
_vinaigrette_.

_To bake._--When prepared as directed above, put it in a baking-pan;
spread a little butter over, put a little water in the bakepan and set
in a quick oven, baste and turn over two or three times, and when done,
serve with the gravy and the same sauces as if it were roasted.

_In Gratin._--Soak, drain and wipe it dry as directed.

Cut it in slices and put them in a crockery or other pan; turn a white
sauce all over, then sprinkle on half a gill of vinegar or the juice of
a lemon, dust with bread-crumbs, put half a dozen lumps of butter, each
about the size of a hazelnut, all over; bake in a rather quick oven.


  KIDNEYS.

_Saute._--When prepared as directed below, cut it in pieces as directed
for kidney in _brochettes_. Then put a piece of butter the size of half
an egg in a frying-pan and set it on the fire; when melted, sprinkle in
a teaspoonful of flour, stirring with a wooden spoon the while, add half
a wine-glass of white wine, a tablespoonful of broth, a pinch of chopped
parsley, salt and pepper, boil ten minutes and lay the fillets in; have
a quick fire, and as soon as cooked dish them, spread the sauce over,
sprinkle on a few drops of lemon-juice, and serve.

_To prepare._--Never cook a kidney except it be very fresh. Prepare in
the following way, a beef, sheep, or calf's kidney. Pig's kidneys are
excellent if they have no disagreeable taste, but it is very often the
case. The bad taste may be partly taken away by blanching the kidney,
but it makes it tough and tasteless; it is better to throw it away.

_In Brochettes._--Split the kidney in four lengthwise, and then cut it
in rather small pieces. Cut fat salt pork in pieces of the same size as
the pieces of kidney--the fatty part of the kidney must not be
used--then salt and pepper the pieces of kidney; take a common skewer
and run it through a piece of kidney, then through a piece of salt pork;
repeat this till the skewer is full. Fill as many skewers as are
necessary till the whole kidney is used; and then roast before a good
fire, basting often with melted butter. Serve warm.

_Another way._--Prepare as above, and instead of roasting, put the
skewers in a bake-pan, spread a little butter over the kidney and salt
pork, cover the bottom of the pan only with cold water, and bake. While
in the oven, turn over and baste occasionally.

Serve as the above, with its gravy, and warm.

_Another._--Skewer the kidney, or rather pieces of kidney and salt pork
as above; dip them in beaten egg, roll them in bread-crumbs, and fry
them in hot fat. Serve warm, but without gravy.


  LIGHTS.

Cut them in four pieces, soak and wash them three or four times in
lukewarm water, changing the water each time; press them with the hands
to extract all the blood. Place the lights in a stewpan, cover them with
cold water, and set on a good fire; boil two minutes, take them off,
throw them in cold water, and drain them; cut the lights in dice. Have
butter in a stewpan on the fire, and when melted, lay the lights in, fry
five minutes, keeping them tossed the while, then sprinkle on a
tablespoonful of flour, stirring all the time with a wooden spoon; pour
on, little by little, about a pint of warm broth, also a saltspoonful of
chopped parsley, a pinch of allspice, salt, pepper, a bay-leaf, and
sprig of thyme; have a brisk fire, and when about half done, add four or
five mushrooms, and eight small onions. When the whole is cooked, take
off bay-leaf and thyme, then take from the fire, beat two yolks of eggs
with a tablespoonful of vinegar, and mix with the whole, turn on a dish,
and serve.


  CALF'S LIVER.

_How to prepare._--Have water, with a little salt, on the fire, and at
the first boiling, throw the liver in for about five minutes, and drain
it.

_How to improve the Liver before cooking it._--Put in a tureen two
tablespoonfuls of sweet-oil, a bay-leaf broken in four pieces, two
sprigs of thyme, four of parsley chopped fine, a green onion also
chopped fine, salt, and pepper; lay the liver on the whole, and leave it
from four to six hours, turning it over two or three times.

_How to cook, roasted._--Envelop the liver with buttered paper, place it
on the spit before a good fire, baste often with the oil from the
tureen, after having taken off bay-leaf and thyme. A few minutes before
it is done, take the paper off, baste continually with the drippings
till well cooked, and serve it with the gravy.

It may also be served with a _piquante_ or _poivrade_ sauce.

It takes from thirty-five to forty-five minutes to roast it.

_The same, saute._--Put two ounces of butter in a frying-pan, and set it
on a sharp fire; when melted, add a teaspoonful of chopped parsley and
green onions, then the liver cut in slices (after having been prepared
as above); sprinkle on a saltspoonful of flour, then half a wine-glass
of warm broth, same of claret wine, salt, pepper, and a pinch of
allspice; serve when done.

It takes only from ten to twelve minutes for the whole process.

_The same, in the Oven._--Put two ounces of butter in a frying-pan on a
sharp fire; when hot, put the liver in (after having been boiled as
directed above, and after having cut it in pieces); fry it five minutes,
turning over once only; then take from the fire, salt both sides of the
slices, place them on a warm dish, putting on each slice a little butter
kneaded with chopped parsley, salt, and pepper; put two or three minutes
in a warm oven, take off, sprinkle on the whole the juice of half a
lemon, and serve in the dish in which it has cooked.

_The same, stewed._--Boil the liver as directed above, and when drained
and cold, lard it well. Have butter in a frying-pan on a brisk fire;
when hot, put the liver in for about five minutes, turning it over on
every side. Have in a stewpan four ounces of bacon cut in dice; set it
on a good fire, and when hot, lay the liver in; then add a glass of warm
broth, same of white wine, a bay-leaf, a sprig of thyme, two of parsley,
a clove of garlic, two cloves, and a small carrot cut in two; cover the
stewpan, subdue the fire, and let simmer three hours; stir now and then,
place the liver on a dish, strain the sauce on it, and serve.


  CALF'S PLUCK.

Put the pluck in cold water for twelve hours in winter and four in
summer; change the water once, drain, and throw it in boiling water for
ten or fifteen minutes; take off and throw in cold water to cool, and
drain it. Cut the pluck in pieces, and cook it like calf's head, and
serve with the same sauce.


  CALF'S TAIL.

Take two tails, cut each in two, throw them in boiling water for three
minutes, and drain. Cut a cabbage in two, trim off the stump, throw the
two halves in boiling water, with a little salt, for fifteen minutes,
and drain it. Put in a tureen the tails, cabbage, six ounces of lean
bacon, two sprigs of parsley chopped fine, same quantity of green
onions, two cloves, a little piece of nutmeg, a clove of garlic, salt,
and pepper; cover the whole with half broth and half water, and boil
gently till cooked. Then take off cloves, nutmeg, and garlic, turn the
remainder on a dish, and serve.


  TONGUE.

Prepare, cook, and serve a calf's tongue, in the same and every way like
a fresh beef's tongue. The only difference is, that, being smaller, it
is seldom decorated.

It may be split in two, lengthwise and nearly through, opened and served
thus, with slices of pickled cucumbers.


  SWEETBREADS.

_To prepare._--Soak them in cold water for about an hour. Take off and
remove the skin and bloody vessels that are all around. For two
sweetbreads set about one pint of water on the fire in a small saucepan
with salt, a tablespoonful of vinegar, a few slices of onion, six
pepper-corns, a clove of garlic, two cloves, six sprigs of parsley, one
of thyme, and a bay-leaf; boil two minutes, drop the sweetbreads in,
boil one minute and take them off. Drop them immediately in cold water
and leave them in for from two minutes to an hour. Put them on a flat
surface with a board over, and leave them thus till they are perfectly
cold and rather flattened.

_Au Jus._--Trim them a little, so as to give them a better appearance.
Lard the top or smooth side, then butter the bottom of a pan, spread a
few slices of onion on the butter; add a bay-leaf, a clove, two stalks
of parsley; place the sweetbreads on the whole, the larded side up,
cover the pan and set on a good fire, or in a rather warm oven; about
ten minutes after, add two or three tablespoonfuls of broth, baste now
and then till done. If the broth is absorbed before the sweetbreads are
done, add some more. Dish the sweetbreads, turn the gravy over them
through a strainer, and serve.

_Another way._--Prepare as above directed; then, instead of larding it,
you knead well together two ounces of butter, a teaspoonful of shallots
and parsley well chopped, half a clove of garlic, salt, and pepper;
place the whole in a stewpan, with the sweetbreads on it, and thin
slices of bacon on the sweetbreads; set the pan on a good fire, and add
then half a glass of broth, same of white wine; simmer till cooked; dish
the sweetbreads, throw a few drops of cold water in the sauce, skim off
the fat, strain the sauce on the sweetbreads, and serve.

When the sweetbreads _au jus_ are dished as directed, place tastefully,
all around, either of the following garnitures: _cauliflower_,
_chicken-combs_, _duxelle_, _financiere_, _mushrooms_, _liver_,
_Macedoine_, _quenelles_, and _truffles_. Besides these garnitures, the
sweetbreads may be decorated with small skewers, run through a boiled
_craw-fish_ and a small _quenelle_ of chicken or of veal. One or two
skewers may be stuck in each sweetbread.

The sweetbreads, when several are served at a time, may be placed on the
dish, either around it, forming a kind of crown, or forming a pyramid,
or in any other way, according to fancy. They may also be served with a
sauce _fines herbes_.




  PORK.

  TO SELECT.


When the rind is tender and thin, the pork is young; when thick and
hard, it is old.

To be good, the meat must be soft, and have a fresh and good appearance.

We do not think it necessary to indicate here how to make black
puddings, chitterlings, Bologna, and other sausages. It is nearly, if
not quite impossible, for a person having no practice in it, to make
them edible; it is better to buy them ready made at pork-butchers'
shops, or to hire an experienced person to make them.


  CHINE AND FILLET.

Take a good chine of pork, place it on the spit before a sharp fire,
baste often with a little melted butter first, and then with the
drippings; when properly cooked, serve it with a _vinaigrette_,
_Robert_, _piquante_, or _poivrade_ sauce. It will take from two to
three or four hours to roast, according to the size of the chine.


  HOW TO IMPROVE THE CHINE OF PORK.

Place it in a crockery vessel, pour on it two tablespoonfuls of
sweet-oil, then sprinkle on two teaspoonfuls or chopped parsley, also
salt and pepper, two onions chopped fine, four cloves, and two
bay-leaves; leave thus twenty-four hours in winter, and ten in summer,
turning over two or three times. The taste of the meat is much improved
by that process. The oil may be used for basting instead of butter.

_Baked._--Put the chine in a bakepan, sprinkle salt over it, coyer the
bottom of the pan with cold water, and put in a rather quick oven, baste
often, and in case there should be much fat in the pan, take it off and
add a little cold water.

When overdone, serve with any of the following _purees_: beans, lentils,
Lima beans, onions, peas, potatoes, sorrel, or spinach.

It may also be served with the following sauces: _fines herbes_,
_piquante_, _poivrade_, _Provencale_, _ravigote_, _remolade_, _Robert_,
_tarragon_, _Tartar_, and _vinaigrette_.

It is served also with a tomato-sauce. Make more sauce for pork than for
other dishes, and make the tomato-sauce rather thick by boiling it
gently for some time; it tastes better so with pork.

Always use mustard with pork, if you like it. Horse-radish, also, is
good with it.


  CUTLETS.

Flatten the cutlets with a chopper (they may be improved in the same way
as the chine), place them on the gridiron and set on a sharp fire; turn
over two or three times, and when properly done, serve them with a
_piquante_, _Robert_, or tomato-sauce, adding to them some slices of
pickled cucumbers just before serving.

_The same, sautees._--Instead of broiling them, when prepared as above,
place them in a frying-pan with a little butter, turn over two or three
times during the cooking, and serve as the above, or on a _puree_ of
sorrel.


  LEG, ROASTED.

_How to improve it._--Take the skin or rind gently off, put the leg in a
crockery vessel, pour on it the following mixture: a pint of white wine,
two tablespoonfuls of sweet-oil, a bunch of sage, salt, pepper, and a
pinch of grated nutmeg. Leave it thus two days in winter and one in
summer, turning it over two or three times during the process.

Place the leg on the spit and put before a very sharp fire, baste often
with the mixture from the crockery vessel, or with melted butter, and
serve when cooked, with the gravy strained. It will take about two or
two and a half hours to roast it.

_Baked._--Bake and serve the leg in the same and every way as the chine,
with _purees_ and sauces. Any part of pork is prepared like chine.

_Ham in hors-d'oeuvre._--Cut the ham in small and thin slices, place the
slices tastefully on a dish, either overlapping or in pyramid, or in any
other fancy way, and serve with parsley in the middle or around. Slices
of lemon may also be served with it, either with the parsley or without
it.


  HAM.

_To boil._--Sugar-cured are preferred to others.

Scrape off the outside gently, soak in cold water for from six to
twenty-four hours, take off and wipe dry.

Envelop it in a towel and tie it. Place it in a kettle large enough to
hold it without bending it; cover with cold water; season with six small
onions, two carrots, four cloves, two bay-leaves, a handful or two
plants of parsley, two or three stalks of thyme, two of celery, two
cloves of garlic (a handful of hay and half a bottle of white wine, if
handy would improve the taste); boil gently for four or five hours,
according to the size (four hours for a ten-pound one, five for a
fifteen-pound one). Pay no attention to the old saying that "it takes
half an hour to every pound."

Take from the fire, remove the towel, break off and remove the small
bone at the larger end of it, and without tearing the meat. Remove the
rind also, leaving only about two inches of it near the smaller end,
cutting it so that it will be dentilated.

_To decorate._--It is decorated in several ways, according to taste and
fancy. If the fat is not white after having removed the rind, spread a
very thin coat of lard over it, place the ham on a dish, the fatty side
up. Cut carrots, turnips, and beets, boiled tender, in fancy shapes,
with paste-cutters or with a knife; place them tastefully all over the
ham; place also all over it some parsley, capers, and olives. Chop some
meat-jelly and put it all around the dish, and serve. In carving it,
scrape back the lard and vegetables, slice, and serve.

_Another._--When boiled, trimmed, and the rind removed, put it in the
oven for about twenty minutes, basting the while with a Madeira sauce.
Serve with the sauce. Any kind of _puree_ may be served with it.

_Another._--When trimmed and soaked in water as directed, boil it with
half wine and half water: the same seasonings as when boiled in water.
Use either Catawba, Sauterne, or Rhine wine. It makes it more expensive,
but it is excellent. It is served as when boiled in water.

_Another._--Boil it in claret wine, and when trimmed and decorated,
serve it with a mushroom or a _truffle_ sauce.

_Another._--Boil, trim, and cut off the rind as described in the above
cases; place the frill, and serve with _spinach au beurre._

[Illustration: A, skewers; B, carrot; C, truffle or mushroom; D, jelly;
E, frill.]

_Another._--Boil and trim the ham as above, cut the rind in the same
way. What is left of the rind is cut as seen in the cut opposite: that
is, some small square pieces are cut off, from place to place, so that
it resembles a checkerboard; stick two or more skewers in it, glaze it
with essence of beef or with sugar, and serve either on a tomato-sauce
or on _peas a l'Anglaise_.

_Ham English fashion._--Soak it in water and trim it as directed. Make
some paste with water and flour only; spread a coat of this paste all
over the ham, and then envelop it in buttered or oiled paper. Put it on
the spit and baste with fat while it is roasting. Roast it for three or
three and a half hours, according to size; remove the paper about two
hours after it has been taken from the fire; cut a hole in the paste
about an inch in diameter and on the lean side; pour into it, little by
little, half a pint of good Madeira wine, cover the hole with some
paste, placing a band of paper on it to prevent it from falling; put
the ham back on the spit for about twenty minutes, and serve whole with
Madeira sauce. We mean, by serving whole, with the paste around it, but
not the paper.

Besides the sauce, some green vegetables, boiled only, are served on
separate dishes, but eaten with the ham.

It is also served like game, with currant-jelly, apple-sauce, etc.

_Champagne Sauce._--Proceed as for the above in every particular, except
that you use Champagne instead of Madeira wine, and when done serve it
with a Champagne sauce.

_Another._--It may be boiled as directed above, and served with a
Champagne sauce also.

_Another._--When soaked and dry, put it in a crockery vessel; put on and
all around it four onions chopped fine, two bay-leaves, two sprigs of
thyme, a piece of nutmeg, and pour on the whole a bottle of white wine;
cover the vessel as nearly air-tight as possible, leave it thus for
about twenty-four hours, turning it over two or three times, so as to
let every side take the seasonings. Place the ham on the spit before a
good fire, baste often with the seasonings from the crockery vessel, and
when done take it off, dust it with fine raspings of bread, place it
fifteen minutes in a slow oven, strain the drippings, boil them till
reduced to a proper thickness, dish the ham, pour the drippings on it,
and serve.


  SALTED PORK.

The best and only proper way to cook salted pork, is, to put it in a
kettle, entirely cover it with cold water, boil gently till cooked, and
serve it with a _puree_ or with a garniture of cabbage. Any thing else
that you might put with it would rather spoil than better it.


  PIG'S EARS.

_How to prepare._--Soak them in warm water for a few minutes, then wash
and clean them well, and scrape the hair off, if any.

_Boiled._--When prepared, you throw them in boiling water for two
minutes and take from the fire; add four onions for four ears, one
carrot, salt and pepper; leave just water enough to cover the whole, and
when cooked, drain. Serve them on a _puree_ of beans or of lentils.

_The same, broiled._--When cleaned, prepared, and cooked as above, just
dip them in beaten eggs, roll them in bread-crumbs, place on the
gridiron and on the fire, broil for about two or three minutes; then
serve them with a _maitre d'hotel_ sauce.


  PIG'S FEET.

_Broiled, or a la Sainte Menehould._--Split six feet in two, lengthwise,
and soak them in tepid water for ten minutes, then envelop each in a
piece of linen well tied or sewed; place them in a kettle or stewpan
with four small onions, four sprigs of parsley, two of thyme, two of
sweet basil, two bay-leaves, two cloves of garlic, two cloves, two small
carrots cut in pieces, salt, pepper, and half a pint of white wine;
cover with cold water, simmer about six hours, skim them properly, fill
with boiling water so as to have them covered all the time; take from
the fire when cooked, and when nearly cool take the feet from the
kettle, untie them, throw away the linen, and let them cool. Dip each in
melted butter or in sweet-oil, roll in bread-crumbs, and place on a
gridiron and on a good fire; serve them as they are, when properly
broiled.

_Stuffed._--Prepare the feet and cook them as above. When perfectly
cold, remove the long bone of each half, fill the place with
sausage-meat; dip each in melted butter and yolk of egg, mixed and
seasoned with salt and pepper, roll in bread-crumbs, and broil. While
they are broiling, baste them with melted butter. Serve as they are, or
with meat-jelly, or gravy.

_Stuffed with Truffles._--Proceed as with the above in every particular,
so far as removing the long bone of each half, so as to be ready for
stuffing them.

Cut truffles in small dice, enough to half fill the feet, and put them
on the fire in a small saucepan, just covered with Madeira wine; toss
and stir till the wine is absorbed and nearly boiled away, then add a
little gravy, stir half a minute, take from the fire and let cool. When
cold, fill each half foot till half full, and finish with sausage-meat;
then dip in butter and egg, roll in crumbs, broil and serve as the
above.

They may be filled with truffles only, and served with meat-jelly.


  PIG'S HEAD.

Soak in water and clean it well; take all the bones and flesh out; then
cut the flesh and about one pound of salt pork in strips, which you put
inside of the head, well mixed with salt, pepper, half a dozen
middling-sized onions chopped, two teaspoonfuls of chopped parsley, half
a saltspoonful of allspice, two bay-leaves, two sprigs of thyme, a
little sage, and the juice of half a lemon; lay it in a crockery vessel
for from four to six days. Envelop the head in a towel, place it in a
kettle with eight small onions, two carrots cut in pieces, salt, pepper,
four sprigs of parsley, four of thyme, four bay-leaves, two cloves, and
a pint of white wine; cover with water, set on the fire, and simmer from
six to eight hours; take from the fire and drain, take the towel off
and drain again till dry and cold. Serve it with sprigs of green parsley
around.

_Wild-Boar like_.--Prepare, stuff, cook, and allow it to cool as the one
preceding; then place it on an oval dish, the ears up, with one or two
skewers to hold them in place, and also two or three decorated skewers
in the middle of the head and between the eyes--not across, but
lengthwise. Glaze it with essence of beef, by means of a brush; make
eyes with meat-jelly, which you cut with a vegetable spoon, and imitate
the tongue, teeth, and tusks with butter colored with cochineal and
kneaded with flour. Cover the back part with jelly and skewers
ornamented with flowers or slices of truffles, or with both. Some jelly,
chopped, may also be placed all around, and flowers in the ears and on
the eyes. It is served as an _entree_, or for supper, lunch, or
breakfast.


  PIG'S KIDNEYS.

Prepare, cook, and serve like calf's kidneys.


  PIG'S TAIL.

Prepare, cook, and serve like pig's ears.


  PIG'S TONGUE.

Prepare, cook, and serve like beef tongue.

_Head-cheese_.--Soak a pig's head in cold water for two or three hours,
clean, and then cut the whole of it, ears and tongue included, in strips
one or two inches long, and then put the whole with about two pounds of
salt pork, cut in strips also, in a crockery bowl, season with salt,
pepper, chopped onion, chopped parsley, thyme, bay-leaf, and sage,
chopped also, the juice of a lemon, and leave thus for about two or
three days, turning it over occasionally. Then put the mixture in a
mould or wrap it in a towel and boil till done. It must be immersed in
the water.

Some beet or sheep's tongue, together with the flesh of chicken, may be
added to the head.

When cooked and cold, if there are any empty places, they may be filled
with meat-jelly.

It is served at late suppers, or at lunch and breakfast. It is always
served cold, with parsley around.


  SUCKING-PIG.

A sucking-pig, to be good, must be fat.

Then properly cleaned, and hoofs off, clean the inside, leaving the
kidneys; skewer it, put in it half a pound of butter kneaded with
chopped parsley and green onions, four or five mushrooms, and two white
onions with a clove stuck in each; place it on the spit before a good
fire, baste often with melted butter first, and then with the drippings,
and when done serve on a _vinaigrette_.

Some truffles may be added to the seasoning, if handy; it gives it a
good taste.

_Baked_.--Stuff it as the above, place it in a baking-pan with just cold
water enough to cover the bottom of the pan; put it in a quick oven,
baste often, and when done serve with a _remolade_ or _vinaigrette_
sauce.

When roasted or baked, place it on a dish with slices of truffles,
mushrooms, and parsley all around. Run some skewers through slices or
truffles and whole mushrooms, and plant them in it like the one
represented in the cut on the following page.

A small red apple is placed in the mouth after it is cooked, to make
room for which a stone is placed in the mouth before cooking it, in
order to keep the mouth open. It is served as warm as possible.

[Illustration: A, skewer; B, slices of truffles; C, mushrooms]

_Boned_.--A sucking-pig can be boned and filled just the same as a
turkey, and cooked and served alike also.




  POULTRY.


Chickens, ducks, turkeys, and geese must be killed not less than
twenty-four hours, and not more than three days in summer, nor less than
two days nor more than six days in winter, before cooking them.


  HOW TO PREPARE AND CLEAN.

To transport poultry, _see_ Game.

Poulterers are of the opinion that the best and quickest way of killing
poultry is by cutting the throat or the tongue. Tie the legs of the
bird, hang it by the legs, then kill and let bleed. Some cut the head
off and throw it away on the ground, but the poor things do not die so
fast, and therefore suffer more.

As soon as the throat or tongue is cut, if the head is held down the
bird dies sooner, as it allows the blood to run more freely, preventing
the bird from bending and twisting its neck, and also from swallowing
its blood.

It is much better to pick the bird dry. By scalding, the skin is
spoiled, and very often the flesh of a young and tender chicken is
spoiled also, being blanched. When picked, singe the bird carefully, in
order not to burn the skin.

Split the skin on the back of the neck, from the body to near the head;
then detach the skin from the neck by pulling it downward and the neck
upward; it gives you plenty of room to pull the crop out, which you do.
Cut the skin off at about the middle of the neck, and the neck close to
the body; that part of the skin of the neck is left to cover the place
where the neck was cut off, by turning it on the back of the bird, and
holding it with twine in trussing.

Make an incision under the rump, lengthwise, and large enough to draw
the bird easily.

When drawn, wipe the inside of the bird with a towel, but do not wash
it, except when you have broken the gall-bladder. If that should happen,
cut the bird in pieces immediately and wash well in lukewarm water;
never roast or prepare whole a bird that has had the gall-bladder broken
in it in drawing it. _Saute_ it or prepare it in fricassee.

If there should be any thing unclean on the outside, wipe it off, if
possible, or otherwise cut the place off, or wash only the unclean
place. A washed bird is a very inferior article. If you see that a bird
cannot be cleansed properly except by washing it, do not buy it.


  CHICKEN.

_To select._--Buy a chicken with white flesh and pale-yellow fat. If
young, the cock has small spurs, the hen has the lower part of the legs
and feet rather soft and smooth; those parts are rough in old ones.

If the rump is hard and stiff, they are fresh enough; but if soft, it is
necessary to examine the bird carefully; it might be tainted.

_To truss._--When prepared as directed for poultry, put the bird on the
table on its back, and with a chopper or with a round stick flatten the
breast-bone, which you break at a single blow if possible; the bird is
much more sightly when served. Cut the legs off just above the first
joint, or cut off only half of the claws and trim off the ends of the
wings. Place the bird on a table, the breast up and the rump toward you.
Push the legs under the skin, so that, by holding them perpendicularly
and pressing on them, the part from the second to the third joint is
alongside the chicken, or horizontally. Then run a trussing-needle, with
twine attached to it, just above the bone of the leg, as near the second
joint as possible, on the side (toward you) of the bone of the leg that
is perpendicular, through the leg (which leg is the left one of the
bird), body, and also through the bird, and at the same place, that is,
as near the second joint as possible. Turn the bird upside down and the
neck toward you; turn the ends of the wings on the back, as seen in the
cut (p. 240), turn the skin of the neck on the back also, between or
under the wings and in order to cover the place where the neck has been
cut off, then run the needle again through the right wing, the skin of
the neck and part of the body, and through the other wing. Tie the ends
of the twine fast together.

As it is, the legs of the bird, when on its back, are pointing upward.
Bend them gently down till they are perpendicular and as seen in the
cut, run the trussing-needle through both and also through the body,
above the bones of the legs and under the end of the breast-bone; run it
again the other way, but under the bones of the legs, tie the two ends
of the twine together, and you have a bird trussed exactly like the one
represented in the cut on next page.

[Illustration]

Another way to truss is, to cut only half of the claws, instead of
cutting the legs at the first joint; but, to truss thus, the first joint
must be partly cut as represented below. If the nerve were not cut, it
would contract in cooking, and instead of being straight, the legs would
point upward.

[Illustration]

A bird stuffed is trussed exactly in the same way as above, with the
exception that the skin of the neck must be sewed up with a
trussing-needle before commencing to truss the legs, and the incision
must also be sewed up as soon as filled and before trussing.

The twine used to sew and truss the bird is removed just before dishing
it.

Some experiments have been made lately, in France, to find out the best
way to kill chickens and make them tender. Those killed by electricity
were more tender than any other, but they must be cooked immediately, as
they become tainted in a very short time.

_To blanch._--When cut in pieces as directed, throw it in boiling water
to which a little salt has been added; boil two minutes and drain.

_To cut._--To make a chicken _saute_ or in fricassee, it is generally
cut into eight pieces; the two legs, the wings, one piece of the
breast-bone, and three pieces of the back-bone. The ends of the wings,
the lower part of the legs after being skinned by warming them, the
neck, gizzard, heart, kidneys, and head, are put in the soup-kettle.
Generally the bones of the legs above the second joint are removed by
breaking them with the back of a knife just above the second joint. The
ends of the small bones of the three pieces of the back-bone are trimmed
off also.

_To dish and serve._--Dish the pieces in the following order: the neck,
gizzard, the fore part of the back and the low part of the legs in the
middle; then one leg on each side of the dish, with one wing beside
each, then the breast and hind part of the back, and lastly the ends of
the wings at the top. If cut in eight pieces only, place the breast-bone
on the middle of the dish, the hind part of the back-bone at one end of
it and the two others at the other end; the legs and wings on each side.

_Boiled._--A chicken is boiled only when it is an old one, whose
tenderness is doubtful, and which is not needed to make broth or
_consomme_.

Clean, prepare, and truss it as directed for poultry. Brown the bird in
a saucepan with about one ounce of butter, then half cover it with cold
water; season with a few slices of onion, same of carrot, two cloves,
two stalks of parsley, salt and pepper. Boil gently about one hour and a
half, and when done, dish the bird, strain the sauce over it, and serve
warm.

If the sauce boils away, add a little cold water; and if there is any
fat on it, skim it off.

An old chicken may be cooked especially to make a salad.

_Boned._--Pick, bone, fill, cook, and serve a boned chicken exactly like
a boned turkey; the only difference is, that it requires less filling,
being smaller.

For an extra, legs of large chickens may be boned and filled like the
chicken, the rest being used for a fricassee.

_Broiled._--Young, or what are called _spring chickens_, are broiled; an
old one would not be as good.

To broil, a chicken is split in two lengthwise, or the back only is
split, so as to open it. Salt both sides and butter them slightly, then
broil on a good but not sharp fire. Serve with a _maitre-d'hotel_,
_piquante_, or _ravigote_ sauce.

_Broiled hunter-like._--When cleaned and prepared, split the chicken in
two lengthwise and place it in a crockery dish with the following
seasonings: a teaspoonful of parsley chopped fine, a middling-sized
onion in slices, two cloves, salt, pepper, a tablespoonful of sweet-oil,
and the juice of half a lemon. Half an hour after turn the chicken over,
and after another half hour place the above seasonings all around the
chicken, fasten them with paper, tie the paper with twine, and broil
carefully on a rather slow fire, and turning over two or three times.
When done, remove the paper in which they are enveloped, scrape off the
slices without scratching the meat, and serve as warm as possible with a
_maitre-d'hotel_, _ravigote_, or _Madeira_ sauce.

When an older chicken is prepared hunter-like, it is generally served
with a _Tartar_ sauce.

_Another way._--Clean and prepare a chicken as directed. Cut the neck
off, also the legs at the first joint, split the breast in two so as to
open the chicken, and flatten it with a chopper. Put about two ounces of
butter in a saucepan and set it on the fire; when melted, add a
teaspoonful of chopped parsley, stir for half a minute with a wooden
spoon, then put the chicken in with salt and pepper; when about half
fried on one side, turn it over and half fry the other side; then take
off the chicken, roll it in chopped parsley and bread-crumbs mixed
together, broil it properly and serve on a _Tartar_ sauce.

A chicken broiled either way above described may also be served on a
_Bechamel_ or on a _cream_ sauce.

_Croquettes._--The proportions that we give below are for half a
middling-sized chicken.

A chicken may be cooked especially to make _croquettes_, but it is
generally made with cold meat.

Chop the meat fine. Chop fine also half a middling-sized onion; fry it
with one ounce of butter, then add half a tablespoonful of flour, stir
for half a minute, then add also the chopped meat and a little over a
gill of broth, salt, pepper, a pinch of nutmeg, stir for about two
minutes, take from the fire, mix two yolks of eggs with it, put back on
the fire for one minute, stirring the while; lastly you add four
mushrooms chopped, or two truffles, chopped also, or both, according to
taste; do not put back on the fire, but turn the mixture into a dish,
spread it and put it away to cool.

When perfectly cold, mix it well, as the upper part is more dry than the
rest; put it in parts on the paste-board, about a tablespoonful for each
part. Have bread-crumbs on the paste-board, roll each part of the shape
you wish; either round like a small sausage, or flat, or of a
chop-shape; then dip each _croquette_ or part in beaten egg, roll in
bread-crumbs again, and fry in hot fat. (_See_ Frying.)

The best way to shape them, is to roll each part round first with a few
bread-crumbs, then with a knife smooth both ends, while with the left
hand you roll them gently, and if wanted flat, strike gently on them
with the blade of a knife. If wanted of a chop-shape, when flat, shape
with the hands and strike again to flatten them.

_Croquettes_ are made with any kind of cold meat.

_In Fricassee._--Clean, prepare, and cut as directed. If the flesh is
not white, blanch it. Put it in a saucepan, cover it with broth or cold
water (broth is better than water), set it on the fire, and add one
onion whole, and if covered with water, add also a bunch of seasonings,
composed of three stalks of parsley, one of thyme, a bay-leaf, and one
clove, boil gently till done. Put about two ounces of butter in a
saucepan with one tablespoonful of flour, set on the fire, stir and mix
while the butter is melting; then turn the broth or water in which the
chicken has been cooked into this pan through a strainer, add salt, six
mushrooms sliced, then the pieces of chicken; give one boil, dish the
pieces as directed, mix a yolk of egg in the sauce, turn it over the
chicken, and serve with or without a border of paste.

_Border of Paste._--Knead well together, so as to make a rather thick
paste, two whites of eggs with flour; spread it with a rolling-pin in a
long strip about two inches and a half broad and one-fifth of an inch
thick. Trim the sides if not straight; cut three rows of holes in the
middle with a fruit-corer, then cut the strip of paste in two,
lengthwise and in the middle of the middle row of holes. Cut it again
across in pieces about three or four inches long. Put it in a warm place
to dry till hard enough to keep in shape and still be pliable; warm the
dish on which you wish to place it; beat the white of an egg just a
little with a pinch of sugar, glaze the straight side of the paste with
it; place it all around and on the border of the dish with the
dentilated side up. Place the pieces of chicken inside of the border as
directed above, and serve.

The cut below represents the border. One, _a_, is the border before
being cut in two, and _b_ when cut.

[Illustration]

It may seem difficult to place the border at first, but it will be
easily done after having tried once or twice, and following the
directions previously given. It is better to try when not in a hurry and
before being wanted; that is, before you wish to serve it. The border
may be made and placed on a dish without a chicken, it will be better
for an experiment.

_In Fricassee a la chevaliere or Parisienne._--While the chicken is
cooking as directed for _fricassee_, prepare a garniture of
_chicken-combs_, and, when the chicken is dished, place the garniture
all around it, and serve warm.

_A la Francaise._--While the _fricassee_ is being made, prepare a
_garniture_ of mushrooms or one of truffles, or both.

Dish the chicken as directed, place a garniture of _mushrooms_ or one of
_truffles_, or both, tastefully all around, and serve warm.

When a _fricassee_ is made for several persons, with two, three, four,
or more chickens, three garnitures may be placed around the same dish,
and, when carefully and tastefully arranged, it makes a sightly one.

The three garnitures are, generally, of _chicken-combs_, _mushrooms_,
and _truffles_; they may be also of _chicken-combs_, _quenelles_ of
chicken, and _croutons_; or, of _financiere_, _truffles_, and
_chicken-combs_; or a boiled _craw-fish_ here and there, and two of any
of the above-mentioned garnitures.

Instead of a garniture, it may be served with a border of rice. (_See_
Rice in Border.)

_A la financiere._--This is a _fricassee_ of chicken served with a
_financiere_ garniture.

_Au supreme._--Chicken, or rather chickens, _au supreme_ is a
_fricassee_ made with the breasts of chickens only. Each side of the
breast-bone is carefully detached in two long pieces called _fillets_;
so that, with two chickens, there are eight pieces.

To detach them properly, split the skin right on the breast-bone from
the neck to the rump, then pull it off on both sides so as to have the
whole breast skinned. Take hold of one wing with the left hand, and,
with a sharp knife in the right, split or cut the joint off carefully,
we mean the third joint of the wing, or that near the body; as soon as
the joint is cut, by merely raising the back of the knife, leaving the
edge on the cut joint and pressing gently on the chicken, you easily
pull off the larger part of the half breast; detach the end of the other
half with the point of the knife and pull it off also.

Do the same for the other side.

When the breasts or fillets are thus detached, prepare them as chicken
in _fricassee_, and serve with a border of paste, or with one of rice,
as directed in the receipts above, and serve warm.

What is left of the chickens is put in the broth-kettle, or used to make
_consomme_.

_Another supreme._--Detach the breasts of two chickens as above
directed, then prepare the eight pieces or fillets as directed for
chicken _saute_. Ten minutes before taking from the fire, add and mix
with the whole two or three truffles, weighing at least six ounces, and
sliced; finish the cooling, and serve.

_To serve._--Dish the pieces tastefully and according to fancy, and put
the dish away in a warm place, then mix a _supreme_ sauce with what you
have left in the pan, sauce, truffles, etc., boil the whole till rather
thick, stirring continually while it is boiling, turn over the pieces of
chicken, and serve. The _supreme_ sauce used in that case is generally
made with very rich chicken gravy.

Chickens _au supreme_ is considered a very _recherche_ dish, and it is a
rather expensive one. For a grand dinner, the breasts of six chickens
are used, and all the other parts of the chicken are used to make
chicken gravy with rich broth, and that gravy is, in its turn, used to
make the _supreme_ sauce that is mixed with the liquor in which the
chicken has cooked.

The broth used to _saute_ the chicken is generally rich, and very often
two pounds of truffles are used with six chickens.

_A la Bourguignonne._--This is a _fricassee_ also, but instead of
covering the chicken with broth or water, it is covered with white wine.

Proceed, for the rest, and serve as _fricassee_.

_With Carrots._--While you are cooking a chicken in _fricassee_, prepare
a dish of carrots _au jus_ or _glazed_, for ornamenting the dish; cut
the carrots with a vegetable spoon before cooking them.

Dish the chicken as directed, place the carrots tastefully all around
the meat, and serve warm. This dish was devised by a monk, and is often
called _a la Saint Lambert_.

_A la Royale._--This is nearly the same as _au supreme_; the only
difference is, that the pieces of breast or fillets are larded with salt
pork, and then cooked, served and decorated the same as described for
_au supreme_.

_Marengo._--Clean, prepare, and cut up the chicken as for _fricassee_.
Put in a stewpan five teaspoonfuls of sweet-oil, and set on a good fire;
when hot, put the chicken in with salt and pepper; turn over once in a
while, till every piece is of a golden color, and nearly cooked, then
add two sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, a bay-leaf, and one clove, tied
together with twine; add also three or four mushrooms cut in slices, and
if handy three or four truffles also cut in slices; when the whole is
cooked, dish the pieces of chicken thus: the neck and gizzard, with the
fore part of the back, and the low part of the legs in the middle, one
leg on each side of the dish with one wing beside each, then the breast
and hind part of the back, and the ends of the wings at the top. Have an
Italian sauce ready, pour it on the chicken, place on the whole the
pieces of mushrooms and truffles, also some _croutons_ fried in butter,
and serve.

_With Green Peas._--Clean, prepare, and truss the bird as directed for
poultry, then cook it whole as a stewed chicken above. When done, dish
the chicken, place peas _a l'Anglaise_ all around, strain the sauce over
the whole, and serve.

_Larded with Truffles._--Clean, prepare, and truss a fat chicken. Make
about two dozen small pegs, with truffles, about half an inch long and
one-eighth of an inch in diameter. Take a skewer, make a hole in the
flesh of the breast of the chicken, and put a truffle-peg into it. Put a
dozen pegs in the same way on each side of the breast-bone, and cook and
serve the chicken. It is either boiled, stewed, or roasted, and served
as directed for either.

_With Tarragon._--Proceed as for a stewed chicken, with the exception
that it is cooked whole after being trussed as directed for poultry, and
after having stuffed it with two ounces of butter kneaded with half a
dozen stalks of tarragon chopped fine. Serve with a few stalks of
tarragon around the dish.

_Roasted._--Clean, prepare, and truss the chicken as directed. Place it
on the spit slightly salted and buttered all around, or envelop it in
buttered paper, or merely cover the breast with thin slices of salt pork
tied with twine. Baste often, at first with melted butter, and then with
the drippings.

If the bird has been enveloped with paper, the latter must be removed
about ten minutes before taking the chicken from the fire; do the same
with the slices of salt pork.

It takes from twenty-five minutes to one hour to roast a chicken, with a
good fire. The time depends as much on the quality of the bird as on the
size. With a skewer or a small knife, or merely by pressing on it with
the fingers, anyone can learn how to tell when done, after having
roasted only two or three. Even by the look of it, many persons can
tell.

_With Water-cress._--Dish the chicken when roasted, put fresh
water-cress all around, remove the fat from the gravy, which you turn
over the whole; add salt and pepper to taste, a little vinegar or
lemon-juice, and serve warm.

_With Sauces._--When roasted, serve with the following sauces:
_soubise_, _tarragon_, _oyster_, _tomato_, and _Provencale_.

_With Garnitures._--Dish the bird when roasted as directed, and place
one of the following garnitures around, and serve warm: _quenelles_ of
chicken or of veal, _Macedoine_, and _cauliflowers_.

_With Macaroni._--Spread four ounces of macaroni _au jus_ on a dish,
place the roasted chicken on it, and serve the whole warm.

_With Butter._--It may be served with its gravy and craw-fish or
lobster-butter.

_With Chestnuts._--When dished, surround the chicken with chestnuts
glazed, and serve.

_With Pigeons._--Dish the bird, place four roasted pigeons around, one
at each end and one on each side; fill the intervals with green peas au
jus, and serve warm.

All the above may be decorated with skewers. Run the skewer in a
_chestnut_ and then in a _craw-fish_; or, in a _quenelle_ and then in a
_chestnut_ or _craw-fish_; or, in a _chicken-comb_, and in a _quenelle_,
and stick it on the chicken. Two skewers only for a chicken make a fine
decoration. Slices of _truffles_, of _mushrooms_, and _chicken-combs_,
make fine as well as delicious decorations.

_Baked._--Put the chicken in a baking-pan, after being cleaned,
prepared, and trussed. Salt and butter the breast, which must be upward,
place a piece of buttered paper on it, and a little cold water in the
bakepan. Set it in a warm, but not too quick oven; baste often with the
liquor in the pan. If the water and juice are absorbed by the heat, add
a little cold water, so as to have liquor to baste with. Remove the
paper about ten minutes before taking from the oven. It takes about
forty minutes to cook a chicken of middle size.

Serve a baked chicken with _sauces_ and _garnitures_, and _decorated_
the same as if it were roasted, and as described in the above receipts.

_Saute._--After being cleaned and prepared as directed, cut the chicken
in pieces as for _fricassee_. Put it in a saucepan with about an ounce
of butter; set on the fire, stir now and then till it is of a golden
color and pour off the fat, if any is in the saucepan. Add a
tablespoonful of flour and stir half a minute, then add also broth
enough to nearly cover the meat, half a pint of white wine, a bunch of
seasonings composed of four stalks of parsley, one of thyme, half a
bay-leaf, and one clove, the four tied together with twine; add salt,
and one onion whole. Boil gently till done. Ten minutes before serving,
add half a dozen mushrooms.

Dish the pieces of chicken as directed for _fricassee_, place the
mushrooms over them, strain the sauce all over, and serve warm.

If the chicken is done before the sauce is reduced or is rather thick,
dish the meat and put it away in a warm place, boil the rest slowly till
reduced, and then turn it over the meat. Serve with or without a border,
as in a _fricassee_. Truffles may be used instead of mushrooms, if
handy, or liked. Water may be used instead of broth, but it is inferior.

_Another._--To be good _saute_, the chicken must be young and tender.
Clean, prepare, and cut as directed. Put about one ounce and a half of
butter in a frying-pan, set it on the fire, and when melted put the
pieces of chicken in, stir now and then till all the pieces have a
golden hue; add a tablespoonful of flour, stir again for about one
minute; then add also salt and pepper, half a pint of broth, or one gill
of broth and one gill of white wine; boil gently for five or six
minutes. Add again a teaspoonful of parsley chopped fine, five or six
mushrooms cut in slices, keep it boiling gently till done, and serve
warm.

If the sauce is boiling away, or is found too thick, add a little broth.
Use _Champagne_, _Sauterne_, or _Catawba_ wine. It is much better with
wine than without.

_Another._--Clean, prepare, and cut the chicken as for _fricassee_. Put
it in a saucepan with about an ounce of butter, set on the fire, stir
once in a while till all the pieces are of a fine golden color; then
pour off the fat that may be in the pan. Sprinkle a tablespoonful of
flour all over it, and stir for about half a minute, then add three or
four shallots, or two or three small green onions, chopped fine,
parsley, and three or four mushrooms, both cut in small pieces, a bunch
of seasonings composed of four sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, a
bay-leaf, and one clove, salt, and pepper.

Stir often till cooked, and serve with a few drops of lemon-juice
sprinkled on it when dished.

Dish as directed for _fricassee_.

_Stewed._--Clean, prepare, and cut the chicken in pieces as for
_fricassee_. Brown them in a saucepan with about one ounce of butter,
then take the pieces off, add half a tablespoonful of flour to the
butter, stir for one minute, then add also three or four mushrooms in
slices, a small onion, and half a dozen sprigs of parsley chopped fine,
stir for two or three minutes, then cover with half a pint of white wine
and the same of broth, boil for ten minutes, put the pieces of chicken
back into the pan, boil gently till done, and serve warm as it is.

The pieces of chicken are dished as directed for _fricassee_.

_Stuffed with Bread._--Soak stale bread in cold water, and then squeeze
the water out of it. Put one ounce of butter in a saucepan and set it on
the fire; as soon as melted, add one middling-sized onion chopped fine,
and stir till it turns rather yellow, then add the bread, stir two
minutes; add again salt, pepper, a pinch of nutmeg, two or three
tablespoonfuls of broth; stir again two or three minutes, take from the
fire, mix in it a yolk of egg, put back on the fire for half a minute,
stirring the while, take off again, add a teaspoonful of chopped
parsley, and use. Fill the crop (we mean the place where the crop was)
and also the body or inside of the bird with the above mixture, truss it
as directed; roast or bake it, and serve with the gravy.

_Stuffed with Sausage-meat._--Set a saucepan on the fire with about half
an ounce of butter in it; when melted add an onion chopped fine, stir,
and, when nearly fried, add also the heart and liver of the bird,
chopped fine, four, six, or eight ounces of sausage-meat (according to
the size of the bird), stir for about twelve minutes, take from the
fire, mix a yolk of egg with it, also four or five mushrooms chopped, or
one or two truffles, chopped also, put back on the fire for five
minutes, stirring the while, take from the fire again, fill the prepared
bird with the mixture, and as above, roast or bake it, and serve it with
its gravy.

_Stuffed with Chestnuts._--Roast chestnuts and skin them, removing also
the white envelope that is under the outside skin. Fill the inside of a
cleaned and prepared chicken till half full, add about one and a half
ounces of butter, finish the filling; truss, roast or bake as directed,
and serve the bird with its gravy.

_Stuffed with Truffles._--The truffles, being preserved, do not require
any preparation, half a pound is enough for a middling-sized chicken; it
is not necessary to put any where the crop was.

Salt and pepper the inside of the bird, and put in it also about a
teaspoonful of parsley chopped fine, then the truffles; sew the incision
made to draw it; truss it as directed, and roast or bake.

_The same, stewed._--When stuffed, put four ounces of salt pork cut in
dice in a saucepan, with slices of onion and carrot, place the chicken
on them, season with four stalks of parsley, one of thyme, a bay-leaf,
and one clove tied together; half cover it with broth and white wine, of
equal parts, set on the fire, boil gently till done, turning it over
several times. Dish the bird, strain the sauce over it, and serve warm.

After being stuffed with truffles, it may be kept two days before
cooking.

_Cold._--What is left from the previous day's dinner is known under the
name of cold meat.

For about half a chicken put one ounce of butter in a saucepan, and,
when melted, turn into it a _financiere_ garniture, and half a pint of
Madeira wine, boil gently about eight minutes, put the cold chicken cut
in pieces in it; leave just long enough on the fire to warm it, and
serve.

If not a roasted or broiled chicken, or part of either, you merely warm
it in the _bain-marie_ if possible, or on the fire, and serve as it is.

If roasted or broiled, it is served in _blanquette_, thus:

Cut up the meat in slices, have in a stewpan and on a good fire a piece
of butter the size of two walnuts; when melted, sprinkle in it a pinch
of flour, stirring with a wooden spoon the while; then pour in also,
little by little, two gills of warm broth, same of boiling water, half a
teaspoonful of chopped parsley, salt, pepper, and two or three small
onions fried in butter; boil fifteen minutes. After that time subdue the
fire, place the slices of chicken in the pan, and serve as it is when
well warmed.

Instead of onions, slices of pickled cucumbers may be used.

_Another way._--Cut up the chicken or part of it as for _fricassee_. Put
a little butter in a stewpan and set on the fire; when melted, sprinkle
in it a little flour, half a teaspoonful of chopped parsley, same of
chopped mushrooms, stir with a wooden spoon the while, two or three
minutes after which add two gills of white wine, boil the whole fifteen
minutes; then subdue the fire, put the pieces of chicken in the pan, and
serve as it is when warm.

It may also, after it is cut up, be served cold, with an oil,
_piquante_, or _poivrade_ sauce.

_The same, in Fricassee._--An old chicken that has been used to make
broth, either alone or with beef, when cool, or the next day, may be
prepared just as a spring chicken in _fricassee_.

_In Salad._--It is made with cold chicken, roasted or baked, with a
whole one or part of it.

Cut all the meat in dice and put it in a bowl.

Cut just as much roasted or baked veal in dice also, and put with the
chicken.

Cut also about as much table celery as chicken, which put with the meat
also. Season with salt, pepper, vinegar, and very little oil; stir and
mix the whole well. Add also some lettuce, and mix again gently. Put the
mixture then on a platter, making a small mound with it; spread a
Mayonnaise-sauce all over it; decorate with hard-boiled eggs, cut in
four or eight pieces, lengthwise; also with centre leaves of lettuce,
capers, boiled beets, and even slices of lemon.

A bard-boiled egg is cut across in two, then with a sharp knife scallop
each half, invert them and run a small skewer through both, so as to
leave the smaller end of both halves in the middle and touching; place
the egg right in the middle of the dish, when the Mayonnaise is spread
all over; plant the centre leaves of a head of lettuce in the middle of
the upper half of the egg, with a few capers in it, and serve.

Some use mustard with a chicken salad; it is really wrong, because
chickens and Mayonnaise-sauce are too delicate to use mustard with them.


  CAPON.

A caponed chicken is cleaned, prepared, cooked, and served in the same
and every way as a common chicken.

A capon is almost always fat, larger than an ordinary chicken, and has a
more delicate and tender flesh.

_Roasted_ and served in the different ways described for chicken, it
makes a _recherche_ dish, also when stuffed with chestnuts or truffles,
as a common chicken.

_Boiled._--Clean and prepare as directed above; rub the fleshy part with
lemon, envelop it with slices of bacon, place it in a stewpan with one
sprig of parsley, one of thyme, a bay-leaf, one clove, a small carrot,
two onions, salt, and pepper; cover with half water and half broth, and
set on a moderate fire. When cooked, take the capon off, place it on a
dish, and set it in a warm place; then boil the sauce till it is rather
thick, when strain it on the capon, and serve.

_The same, with Rice._--When cleaned and prepared as above, you place
the capon in a stewpan, cover it with water, add one glass of broth, a
bay-leaf, one clove, a sprig of parsley, one of thyme, a small carrot,
two onions, salt, and pepper; boil ten minutes, then add also about four
ounces of rice, soaked in lukewarm water before using it, and let simmer
for two hours. Take the capon off, and in case the rice should not be
found to be cooked enough, finish the cooking of it; then take off
clove, parsley, thyme, bay-leaf, carrot and onions, pour the remainder
on the capon, and serve.


  TURKEY.

Tame and wild are prepared and served alike.

The legs of a young hen-turkey are black; the cock has small spurs, and
also black legs.

The shorter the neck the better and fatter the bird.

An old hen has red and rough legs; the cock also has long spurs.

The fatter they are the better; they cannot be too fat. The broader the
breast the better; the skin must be white.

It is fresh enough as long as the legs are not stiff.

_Boiled._--Clean and prepare turkey as directed for poultry.

Put in a stewpan, large enough to hold a turkey, a piece of butter the
size of a duck's egg, also a teaspoonful of chopped parsley, same of
green onions, and four or five mushrooms; set it on a good fire, and, as
soon as the butter is hot, lay the turkey in; turn over now and then
till of a fine golden color, then take it from the pan, cover the breast
with slices of bacon tied with twine, and put it back in the pan; add a
pinch of allspice, six small onions, salt, pepper, a glass of white
wine, and a pint of broth; simmer till cooked, dish it, strain the sauce
on it, and serve. It takes about two hours to cook a turkey of middling
size. A little warm broth should be added, in case the sauce boils away
during the cooking.

_Roasted._--Clean, prepare, and truss a turkey as directed for poultry,
and, if the turkey is not fat, the breast may be larded with salt pork.
Place it on the spit before a sharp fire, basting often with melted
butter at first, and then with the drippings. It may be enveloped in
buttered paper and tied with twine before placing it on the spit; the
paper is removed ten or fifteen minutes before taking from the fire;
serve with the gravy, after having skimmed the fat off.

Some fresh water-cress is placed all around it, and on which you
sprinkle vinegar or lemon-juice.

A turkey may be served in every way as a roasted chicken--with sauces,
garnitures, and decorated with skewers.

_Baked._--When cleaned, prepared, and trussed, put the turkey in a
baking-pan, spread a little butter on it, put a little cold water in the
pan, the depth of about two-eighths of an inch, sprinkle salt all over,
place a piece of buttered paper on it, and put in a quick oven. Baste
often and turn the bird over and round, if necessary. It takes from one
hour and a half to two hours to cook a turkey, according to size,
quality, and also according to the degree of heat.

It is served with the gravy only, after having removed the fat, or with
sauces, garnitures, and decorations, described for roasted chicken.

_Oyster-Sauce._--When roasted or baked as directed, serve warm with an
oyster-sauce.

_With Currant Jelly._--Roast or bake it, and then serve it with
currant-jelly.

It is also served with a cranberry-sauce.

_Stewed._--An old turkey is more tender stewed than cooked in any other
way.

The fleshy parts may be larded with salt pork, if found too lean.

Put in a large stew-kettle half a pound of bacon cut in slices, four
ounces of knuckle of veal, three sprigs of parsley, two of thyme, a
bay-leaf, six small onions, one carrot, cut in four pieces, three
cloves, one clove of garlic, salt, pepper, and then the turkey; wet with
a pint of white wine, same of broth, cover as nearly air-tight as you
can, place in a moderately heated oven or on a moderate fire, let simmer
(not boil) about two hours and a half, then turn it over, put back on
the fire or in the oven for another two hours and a half, after which
dish the turkey; strain the sauce and put it back on the fire to reduce
it to a jelly, which you spread on it, and serve.

Many _connoisseurs_ prefer the turkey served thus when cold; it does not
cost any thing to try it, and it is very handy for a grand dinner, as it
may be prepared one or two days in advance, and is just as good, if kept
in a refrigerator.

_Stuffed with Chestnuts._--Roast chestnuts enough to fill the bird.
Skin them and remove also the white skin under the outer one. Fill the
turkey with them, after having cleaned and prepared it; when about half
full, put in it also from four to six ounces of butter; finish the
filling with chestnuts; sew it up, truss it as directed, and roast or
bake it. Serve with the gravy only.

_Stuffed with Truffles._--Chop fine about four ounces of truffles, and
put them in a stewpan with about a pound of salt pork cut in dice; set
it on a moderate fire; add salt, pepper, a little grated nutmeg, a
bay-leaf, a pinch of allspice, and a pinch of dried thyme; when hot, add
also about two pounds of truffles, boil fifteen minutes, tossing now and
then, and take from the fire. When nearly cool, put the whole in the
turkey and sew it up; leave it thus, if fresh, four days in winter and
one or two in summer; if not fresh, leave it a shorter time.

_Roast_ or _bake_ it as directed above, and serve with the gravy, freed
from the fat part. This dish is considered exquisite by epicures.

_Stuffed with Sausage-meat._--Proceed as for chicken stuffed, in every
particular.

_With Salt Pork._--Place thin slices of salt pork on the breast of a
prepared turkey, covering it entirely, and fastening the slices with
twine; then the turkey is roasted or baked, and served with the gravy.
The slices may be removed a little before taking from the fire, in order
to color the meat.

_Boned._--Buy a good turkey, neither too old nor too fat, and picked
dry. Singe the bird, but do not draw it. Cut the neck off about one inch
and a half from the body. Cut also the wings off just above the second
joint, and the legs just above the first joint; the third joint is the
one nearest the body. Split the skin from the end of the neck to the
rump; use a small sharp-pointed knife; commence to run the knife between
the bones and flesh, on one side, till you come to the third joint of
the wings and legs. By twisting and raising both wings and leg, but one
at a time, you easily crack the joint, and then separate it from the
body with the knife. Continue to run the knife between the bones and
flesh, on the same side, till you come to the breast-bone. Do the same
on the other side. Pull out the crop and cut off the rump from the body,
but without touching the skin, as the rump must come off with the skin
and flesh. Then by taking hold of the bird by the neck with the left
hand, and pulling the skin gently down with the right, you partly
uncover the upper part of the breast-bone; then again run the knife
between that bone and the flesh, on both sides, till you come nearly to
the end or edge of the bone. Then lay the bird on its back, have
somebody to take hold of it by the neck, having the breast of the bird
toward you. All along the edge of the breast-bone there is no flesh
between the bone and the skin. The bird being held as described above,
take hold of the skin of the neck with your left hand, pulling gently
downward, and with the knife detaching the skin carefully from the bone,
the carcass coming off whole. Place the bird on the table, the inside
up, pull out the bones of the wings and legs, scraping the flesh an
around so as to leave it attached to the rest; pull or scrape off all
the tendons of the legs; push legs and wings inside the bird; see that
the rump is clean; cut off the ring under it if necessary. We warrant
that anybody, with an ordinary amount of natural capacity, can bone a
turkey or other bird by following our directions with care. We recommend
persons doing it for the first time not to attempt to do it fast. Now
have at hand about two pounds of sausage-meat seasoned as directed, two
pounds of boiled ham, half a dozen boiled sheep's tongues or a smoked
beef tongue (but really the former is better), a pound and a half of
salt pork, and half a pound of truffles sliced (the latter if handy and
if liked). Cut the ham, tongues, and salt pork in strips about four
inches long, one inch broad, and a quarter of an inch thick. Spread the
bird on the table, the inside up and the rump toward you; salt and
pepper it; place three or four slices of salt pork here and there on it,
then a layer of sausage-meat, strips of ham and tongue and salt pork
alternately on the sausage-meat, slices of truffles if used, again
sausage-meat, ham, etc., till there is enough to fill the bird well;
that is, by bringing the two sides of the skin together, giving the bird
a round form, it is perfectly full. It is impossible to give exact
proportions; it depends not only on the size of the bird, but also on
the quality and degree of fatness of the bird. In two of the same
weight, one may require more than the other to fill it. When filled, and
when the two sides of the skin are brought together as described above,
sew up the cut with a trussing-needle and twine. Wrap up the bird
tightly in a towel, tie the towel with a string, and run the string all
around the towel to prevent it from opening at all. Take a kettle or
saucepan of an oval shape and large enough to hold the bird, put enough
cold water in it to cover the bird, also all the bones of the bird
(broken in pieces), a small piece of lean beef, say one pound, a few
stalks of parsley, two of thyme, two cloves, two cloves of garlic, a
bay-leaf, twelve pepper-corns, a middling-sized carrot sliced, half a
turnip, and salt. Set on the fire, and at the first boiling put the bird
in; boil gently for about three hours if it is a turkey of middling
size, two hours for a middling-sized chicken. When done it partly
floats; that is, the upper part is above the liquor. Take it from the
pan, take the towel off and rinse it in cold water; wrap the bird up in
the towel again and in the same way as before; place it on a large dish,
with the seam or back under; put another plate or dish over it with a
weight on it, and leave thus overnight in a cool place. The next morning
the bird will be perfectly cold and rather flattened; then remove the
towel, also the twine with which it has been sewed, place it on the dish
on which it is to be served, the breast upward; glaze it with essence of
beef or glace; decorate with meat-jelly, and serve.

_How to decorate with Jelly._--When the jelly is congealed and can be
cut with a knife, chop some of it on a coarse towel and put it all
around the bird, about half an inch thick; cut some in slices about a
quarter of an inch in thickness; cut these again with paste-cutters in
different shapes, according to fancy, and place it over the bird, also
according to fancy; again cut some of it in slices about one inch broad,
a quarter of an inch thick and of any length, and cut out of these last
ones pieces of a triangular shape, which put all around the border of
the dish, placed so that one point of each piece is turned toward the
edge of the dish and the two other points touch the other pieces on both
sides; then you have an indented border of jelly. When the jelly is
fancifully and tastefully arranged, it makes a sightly dish.

It is always served cold for breakfast, lunch, or supper.

In summer the jelly melts, and cannot be used as a decoration. A boned
bird is then served without jelly. The bird is cut in slices, and some
jelly is served with each slice.

_Cold._--A turkey, being a large bird, is seldom entirely eaten the day
it is served, and very often more than half of it is left for the next
day. What is left may be prepared in different ways.

_In Vinaigrette._--Cut the flesh in slices and serve them with a
_vinaigrette_. It is not understood here for a boned turkey, which is
always eaten cold, but either a roasted, baked, stewed, or stuffed
turkey.

_In Croquettes._--Proceed in every particular as for chicken
_croquettes_.

_In Salad._--A salad of turkey is made also exactly the same as a salad
of chicken, with cold meat. It is covered with a Mayonnaise-sauce and
decorated in the same way.

Besides the above ways of preparing cold turkey, it may also be prepared
as directed for cold chicken in general.

A caponed turkey is prepared as a caponed chicken, boiled or with rice;
and also like a turkey, as described in the above receipts. They are
generally larger, fatter, and more tender and juicy than others. They
are very much appreciated here, and every year more and more are
supplied, and, as in Europe, the greater the supply the better the
quality. There is a ready market for caponed turkeys in all the large
cities of the United States, and they command a high price.


  DUCKS.

Ducks and ducklings, tame and wild, are prepared alike. To be good, a
duck must be fat, be it a _canvasback_, _gadwell_, _black-duck_,
_garganey_, _poachard_, _wood-duck_, _pintail_, _shoveller_,
_spirit-duck_, _summer-duck_, _teal_, _widgeon_, _shelldrake_, or any
other.

_How to select._--A young duck has the lower part of the legs soft, and
the skin between the claws soft also; you will also know if it is young
by taking hold of it by the bill (the under bill only), if it breaks or
bends, the duck is young.

If the breast of the duck is hard and thick, it is fresh enough.

_How to prepare._--A duck is cleaned and prepared as directed for
poultry.

_Roasted._--Clean, prepare, and truss the duck as a chicken, with the
exception that the rump is pushed inside; the duck being much longer
than a chicken, it is more sightly when so trussed.

Place inside of the duck two sage-leaves, two bay-leaves, and two sprigs
of thyme, and leave it thus in a cool place for two or three hours, and
then roast it as directed for chicken.

When roasted, serve it with any of the following garnitures: cabbage,
cauliflower, _Macedoine_, onion, or truffles.

The fatty part of the gravy or drippings must be carefully and totally
removed before turning it over the duck and garniture. It takes from
thirty to forty minutes to roast.

_Baked._--When cleaned, prepared, and trussed as directed for turkeys
and chickens, put the duck in a bakepan, salt and pepper it, cover the
bottom of the pan with cold water, and place it in a rather quick oven.

A duck, being generally very fat, requires to be turned over and over
several times and to be basted very often. It is not necessary to cover
it with buttered paper. In case there is much fat in the pan, remove it
while it is cooking.

It is served as directed for roast duck, with garnitures.

When roasted or baked, it is also served with apple or cranberry-sauce,
or with currant-jelly.

_With Peas._--Cut in dice about one ounce of salt pork and put it in a
saucepan; set it on the fire, and, as soon as the butter is melted,
brown in it a duck trussed as directed and take from the fire. Put one
ounce of butter in a saucepan and mix it cold with a tablespoonful of
flour, set it on the fire, and, when the butter is melted, put the duck
in with about a quart of green peas, blanched for one or two minutes
only; add about a pint of water or of broth, a bunch of seasonings
composed of three or four stalks of parsley, one of thyme, a bay-leaf,
and one clove, salt, and pepper; boil gently till the whole is cooked,
and serve warm.

Remove all the fat carefully before serving.

If the water should boil away while it is cooking, add a little more.

_With Oranges._--Roast or bake a young duck as directed, and serve it
with carpels of orange all around; and sprinkle some orange-juice all
over just before serving it.

_With Olives._--Roast or bake the duck as directed. When done, turn the
gravy into a small saucepan with about two dozen olives; stir gently,
and keep on the fire for about five minutes. Dish the duck, place the
olives all around; turn the gravy over the whole, and serve warm.

_Saute, served with a Border._--When cleaned and cut in eight pieces as
directed, set it on the fire with one ounce of butter, stir occasionally
till turning brown, then pour off the fat from the saucepan, add broth
enough just to cover the pieces of duck; also one onion with a clove
stuck in it, a bunch of seasonings tied with twine and composed of four
stalks of parsley, one of thyme, and a bay-leaf, salt, and pepper; boil
gently till done. Place the pieces of duck inside of a border of rice,
strain the sauce over the duck only, and serve hot.

The rice must be cooked, moulded, and placed on the dish while the duck
is cooking, so as to serve the whole warm. (_See_ Rice in Border.)

_To cut._--A duck is generally cut in eight pieces, the two legs and
wings, the breast in two, and the back-bone in two.

_With Turnips._--Truss the duck as directed for birds. Put one ounce of
butter in a saucepan, set it on the fire, and, when melted, put the duck
in, turn over now and then till it is brown on every side. Then add a
piece of onion chopped fine, stir, and, when turning brown also, add
water enough to half cover it; also a bunch of seasonings composed of
three sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, a bay-leaf, and a clove; boil
gently till done, when add salt to taste.

While the duck is cooking, cut two turnips in dice or in round pieces
with a fruit-corer, or with a vegetable spoon, set them on the fire with
cold water and salt, boil till tender, and drain them.

Put them back on the fire with the sauce or gravy from the saucepan in
which the duck has cooked, give one boil, dish the duck, place the
turnips around, and serve.

_Another way._--Cut the duck in pieces. Set a saucepan on the fire with
an ounce of butter in it, when melted, add half a tablespoonful of
flour, stir, and, when turning brown, add half a dozen small turnips or
two large ones, cut with a vegetable spoon; stir, and, when they are all
browned, take them off and brown the pieces of duck; then put the
turnips back in the pan, add broth enough just to cover the whole; also
two sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, a bay-leaf, a clove, salt, and
pepper; boil gently till cooked; dish the duck and turnips, turn the
sauce over them through a strainer, and serve warm.

_Cold._--What is left from the preceding day's dinner is prepared in
_salmis_.

Very often a duck is baked, especially to make a _salmis_ with it.
(_See_ Salmis.)

_Boned._--Bone, fill, cook, and serve as turkey boned.

Cold duck may also be prepared in _croquettes_ and salad, like chicken.

_Stuffed._--It is stuffed with sausage-meat and chestnuts, also like a
chicken.


  GEESE AND GOSLINGS--TAME OR WILD.

A young goose has much down and soft legs of a yellow color; an old one
has little down and rough legs of a reddish color. When fresh, the legs
are soft; and stiff and dry when not fresh.

Geese and goslings are prepared, cooked, and served like ducks, in the
following ways: roasted and baked, and served with garnitures, with
cranberry-sauce, currant-jelly, apple-sauce, with a border, olives,
oranges, peas, or turnips; in _croquettes_ and in _salmis_.

It is boned, cooked, and served, like a boned turkey.

_In Civet._--Clean, prepare, and cut the goose in pieces, removing most
of the fat, and then cook, and serve it like rabbit in civet.

It takes a little longer than to cook a rabbit, but makes a very good
dish.

When the civet is properly made, it does not taste like goose.


  GUINEA-FOWLS.

A young Guinea-bird is good, but an old one is hardly fit to be eaten.

Guinea-fowls are prepared and served like prairie-hens.


  PIGEONS.

The stall-fed or squab is prepared the same as the wild one.

_To select._--If the legs are not red, they are young; and if not stiff,
they are fresh. When not fresh, the rump is of a bluish color.

Clean and prepare them as directed for fowls.

_Broiled._--Split the backs of the pigeons so as to open them, flatten
them a little with a chopper. Put two ounces of butter (for six pigeons)
in a saucepan, and set it on a good fire; when hot, add to it a
teaspoonful of chopped parsley and green onions, salt, and pepper; then
the pigeons. When half cooked, take them from the fire, roll them in
bread-crumbs, place them on the gridiron and set on a moderate fire,
turn over once or twice, and, when done, serve on a _maitre d'hotel_,
_piquante_, or _poivrade_ sauce.

_Another way._--When cleaned, prepared, and split open as directed
above, salt and pepper them, grease them slightly with melted butter, by
means of a brush; then broil them till underdone, and serve with a
_maitre d'hotel_ sauce.

_In Chartreuse._--A _chartreuse_ with pigeons is made and served as a
_chartreuse_ of prairie-hens.

_In Papillotes._--When cleaned and prepared as directed, bake the
pigeons till about half done, then split them in two, lengthwise, and
then proceed as for _veal cutlets_ in papillotes.

They may be fried with a little butter, instead of baked.

_With Vegetables._--Clean and prepare as directed for poultry, four
pigeons. Cut them in four pieces each.

Put in a saucepan two ounces of butter, and set it on the fire; when
melted, brown the pigeons in it, and then take them from the pan.

The pigeons being taken off, put into the pan, which is kept on the
fire, half a carrot and two onions sliced, half a turnip, sliced also;
four or five stalks of parsley, one of thyme, one of celery, a bay-leaf,
two cloves; the latter five tied together. Cover the whole with broth or
water; boil gently till about half done, then add the pieces of pigeons,
and salt and pepper; continue boiling till the whole is done.

Dish the pigeons, throw away the seasonings, mash the carrot, onions,
and turnips through a colander, which you mix with the sauce. Place the
mixture around the pieces of pigeons, and serve warm.

_Stuffed._--It is stuffed, cooked, and served like a stuffed chicken.

_The same, stewed._--Put a piece of butter the size of a walnut in a
stewpan, and set it on a good fire; when hot, add two ounces of bacon
cut in dice, then place in four pigeons, leave thus till of a fine
golden color, and then take pigeons and bacon off the pan. Put again in
the stewpan the same quantity of butter as before; when melted, sprinkle
in, little by little, a teaspoonful of flour, stirring with a wooden
spoon, and when of a proper thickness, and of a brownish color, put the
pigeons and bacon back in, add four small onions, two sprigs of parsley,
one of thyme, a bay-leaf, a pinch of allspice, salt, pepper, half a
glass of broth, same of claret wine; simmer about an hour, take off
parsley, thyme, and bay-leaf, and send to the table.

_The same, roasted._--Envelop each pigeon in thin slices of bacon tied
with twine, place them on a spit before a moderate fire, baste often
with the drippings, and, when cooked, serve them with the gravy, at the
same time sprinkling a few drops of lemon-juice on them. It takes from
thirty to thirty-five minutes to roast them.

To roast or bake they are trussed like a chicken, as seen in the cut
below. To carve pigeons is easy, they are merely split in two,
lengthwise.

[Illustration]

_Baked._--Place a thin slice of fat salt pork or bacon on the breast of
each pigeon, after being cleaned, prepared, and salted; place them in a
bakepan, on their back; cover the bottom of the pan with cold water and
put in a hot oven, baste often, and when done serve them with
water-cress and lemon-juice.

The pigeons are placed on the dish the same as they were in the bakepan;
place water-cress between each, also all around and in the middle of
them; sprinkle lemon-juice all over, and serve warm.

_With Green Peas._--When cleaned and prepared, truss the pigeons and put
them in a saucepan with about two ounces of butter for half a dozen,
stir now and then till turning rather brown all around and take off;
then put in the saucepan about two ounces of salt pork cut in dice,
stir, and, when partly fried, take it off also. The pan being still on
the fire, put into it a good tablespoonful of flour, stir till it turns
brown, when you add about a quart of broth, stir and mix; put pigeons
and salt pork back into the pan, season with a bunch of seasonings,
composed of half a dozen stalks of parsley, one of thyme, two
bay-leaves, a clove, and one clove of garlic. Boil gently till nearly
half done, and then add a quart of green peas, blanched previously; boil
again gently till the whole is done; remove the bunch of seasonings and
the clove of garlic; dish the pigeons, turn the peas in the same dish,
but in the middle of the pigeons, which can be tastefully placed all
around the dish; strain the sauce over the whole, and serve warm.

_With Mushrooms._--Prepare and truss the pigeons the same as for the
above, and proceed also as for the above in every particular, except
that you do not put in the saucepan quite as much broth, a pint is
sufficient, and boil gently till done, but do not add peas.

Ten minutes before taking from the fire, add a dozen mushrooms, whole or
sliced, and half a gill of claret wine, if handy.

Dish the pigeons, place the mushrooms in the middle of the dish, strain
the sauce over the whole, and serve warm.

_Fried._--Take four pigeons, cut each in four pieces, put two ounces of
butter in a stewpan and set it on the fire; when melted, put the pigeons
in with two or three sprigs of parsley, a small sprig of thyme, a
bay-leaf, a pinch of allspice, salt, pepper, and half a pint of broth.
Take the pigeons off when half cooked, and, as soon as they are cool,
dip each piece in beaten eggs and roll it in bread-crumbs. Strain the
butter that may be left in the stewpan, and put it in a frying-pan with
about an ounce more, and fry the birds for about two minutes; serve with
water-cress or parsley all around.

_In Compote._--Roast six pigeons as directed. Then cut one of them in
dice, put it in a mortar and pound it. Put half an ounce of butter in a
saucepan, and, when melted, fry half an onion chopped fine in it; then
add to the pounded pigeon about a gill of gravy, a gill of good broth,
salt, pepper, a bunch of seasonings, composed of three stalks of
parsley, one of thyme, a bay-leaf, and a clove; also about a gill of
Madeira wine or white wine, boil gently till reduced about one-third,
strain. Put back on the fire, add butter, and when melted stir and set
it on the corner of the range to keep warm while the rest is prepared.
Cut the other five pigeons in two, lengthwise. Cut ten pieces of bread
square, or of an oval shape, and about the size of a half pigeon, fry
them with a little butter, and place them on a dish. While the bread is
frying, put the pigeons in an oven to warm them; place half a pigeon on
each slice of bread, or one lapping over the other; have the slices and
pigeons so arranged that they fill the dish, leaving only a small space
in the middle, into which you pour the sauce; serve the whole hot.

_In Crapaudine._--When prepared, split open the backs of the pigeons;
cut the legs at the first joints and run them through the skin so that
the ends come out on the inside; dip the bird in beaten eggs, roll them
in bread-crumbs, and broil them.

While they are broiling, knead butter, chopped parsley, and lemon-juice
together; spread some on the pigeons when they are dished, and serve
warm.


  GIBLETS.

By giblets are understood the gizzards, heads, legs, livers, necks, and
ends of the wings of chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, and other birds,
tame or wild.

You begin by cleaning them well, cut off the bills, take the eyes out,
warming the legs on live coals, so that you can take off the outer skin
and spurs; place the giblets in a tureen, turn boiling water and a
little salt on them, leave them thus five or six minutes, then wash well
and drain them.

_In Fricassee._--Put a piece of butter in a stewpan (the size to be
according to the quantity of giblets you have), set it on a good fire;
when melted, sprinkle in it, little by little, a teaspoonful of flour;
stir the whole with a wooden spoon; when of a proper thickness, and of a
brownish color, add half a gill of warm broth, same of warm water, a
sprig of parsley, a small pinch of grated nutmeg, two small onions,
salt, and pepper; then the giblets. About half an hour after add also
two mushrooms, cut in pieces. It takes about two hours to cook them
properly. Dish the pieces, strain the sauce, mix in it one well-beaten
yolk of an egg, and a few drops of lemon-juice; pour it on the giblets,
place the pieces of mushrooms over the whole, and serve.

_The same, stewed._--Put the giblets in a stewpan with butter, and set
it on a good fire; when they are of a fine yellow color, add one or two
sprigs of parsley, a clove of garlic, a sprig of thyme, one clove, half
a bay-leaf, two mushrooms cut in pieces, two small onions, and a pinch
of flour; wet with broth, let simmer gently for half an hour, and add
also two parsnips cut in slices, and previously half fried in butter;
simmer again for about an hour; dish the pieces of meat, strain the
sauce, put it back on the fire to reduce it a little, pour it on the
giblets, place the pieces of mushrooms at the top, and serve hot.

_Saute._--They may also be prepared and served as a _chicken saute_.


  ASPIC OF MEAT.

Cut four middling-sized onions in slices, lay them in a stewpan with a
quarter of a pound of bacon (not smoked); then add about a quarter of a
pound of each of the following meats: chicken, game (any kind), mutton,
and beef, also a calf's foot split in two, two ounces of rind of bacon,
two sprigs of parsley, two of thyme, a clove of garlic, two carrots cut
in two, one clove, and four small onions; wet with half a pint of water,
and set on a brisk fire; cover the pan well. When nearly cooked, take
the grease off with a ladle; add then boiling water enough just to cover
the whole, and finish the cooking. Strain the juice, skim off the fat,
if any, and let it cool; if it is not found clear enough when strained,
beat well two whites of eggs, put them in the stewpan with the juice,
set it on a sharp fire for about ten minutes, stirring the while, and
take from the fire; add to it a few drops of lemon-juice, and strain
again.

Put in a mould some of the above juice, about two-eighths of an inch in
depth; place the mould on ice, and leave till the juice has turned into
a jelly. Lay on that jelly some of the following meats, free from bones,
and not allowing the pieces to touch the sides of the mould: chicken,
game, tongues of beef, calf, and sheep, of all or of either of them (the
meats must be cooked beforehand). Cover the whole with the remainder of
the juice, so as to have about the same thickness at the top as at the
bottom. Place the mould in a refrigerator to cool, and turn into a
jelly; then dip the mould in very warm water, turn over on a dish,
remove the mould, and you have a fine _entree_.




  GAME.


Game, comparatively, is appreciated only by a few.

When the country was first settled, every one was his own provider, and
of course game was not sent to a market several hundred miles from the
place where it was shot or caught. But settlement and civilization have
the same effect on game as they have on barbarians or savages--they
drive it away.

Our Northeastern cities are now supplied by the Western States with
game. In winter time, game may be kept for weeks without being spoiled
or losing its natural flavor and taste, when kept where it is killed;
but when transported, it is very different. To transport it requires
packing. As soon as packed, it naturally ferments; and even if packed
when frozen, the middle of the barrel will ferment and become injured,
if not entirely rendered unfit for the table.

The packing of game or poultry in barrels is a bad practice. Nothing
requires more ventilation than game while being transported. Many
dealers have their game sent to them in wicker-baskets with plenty of
straw, but the greater part is still sent in barrels; hence the musty
taste when cooked.

To keep game for some time when fresh, open the animal or bird under the
rump, just enough to take the inside out, also the crop of birds, being
very careful about the gall-bladder; if it bursts, it is better not to
try to preserve the piece, but to clean, wash, and use it as soon as
possible. Birds must be left in their feathers, and animals in their
skins. Fill the inside with dry and clean oats, and put the piece in a
heap or barrel of oats. It will keep thus for many days.

Another way is to envelop the piece well in a towel, and bury it in
charcoal dust in a cool and dry place.

_How to clean and prepare._--Clean and prepare the birds as directed for
poultry in general.

After having carefully skinned, take out the inside, and cut the legs
off at the first joint of animals; wash the inside with lukewarm water,
and wipe it dry with a clean towel immediately after; wipe also the
outside, but do not wash it if possible; that is, if you can clean it
well by wiping only.

_Wild ducks_, _geese_, _pigeons_, and _turkeys_, are prepared, cooked,
and served like tame ones.

_Bear-meat and Buffalo._--The meat of all large animals is better
roasted, than dressed in any other way. Prepare, cook, and serve bear
and buffalo meat like venison, beef _a la mode_, or stewed.

Bear-meat has highly nutritive qualities, and is very warming.

Buffalo-steaks are said to be better broiled on cinders without a
gridiron, than on or before coals with one; that is, Indian fashion and
even hunters' fashion.

Indians often use wood-ashes as a substitute for salt, and never use
salt with buffalo-meat; but their liking or preference comes from their
habit of invariably broiling buffalo-meat on wood cinders or
buffalo-chips.

_Bear-hams_, so well appreciated everywhere, are prepared and served
like common hams. A bear-ham, tastefully decorated, is considered a
_recherche_ dish at supper for evening parties.

_Blackbird_, _Bobolink_, and _Small Birds_.--The cut below represents
six small birds on the spit, ready for _roasting_. When the birds are
prepared, cut off the ends of the wings and the legs above the first
joint. Instead of cutting the legs above the first joint, the ends of
the claws only may be cut off, according to taste. Cut thin slices of
fat salt pork, of a proper size to cover the breast of the bird; place
the slice on the breast of it, run a skewer through the middle of the
bird, so that it will run through the two ends of the slice of salt pork
also, as seen in the cut.

Have a skewer, or merely a piece of wire, long enough to hold six birds;
fix the skewer on the spit, and roast.

When the six birds are on the skewer, fasten them with twine, to prevent
them from turning round, as seen in the cut.

[Illustration]

Small birds are cleaned and prepared as directed for poultry, but they
are not trussed, their legs being tied while tying the salt pork. While
roasting, they are basted often with the drippings. Some water-cress and
lemon-juice sprinkled upon them may be served with the birds. The twine
is removed before serving, and they must be served hot; if allowed to
cool at all, they lose their taste. It takes from ten to fifteen minutes
to roast.

_Baked._--Prepare them exactly as for roasting: place the wire or skewer
across a baking-pan, turn them round and baste often; serve also as
above, with the gravy, and with or without water-cress.

The _bobolink_, _reed-bird_, and _rice-bird_ are the same; they are
called under these different names at different seasons and in different
localities; it is the American ortolan, the most delicate of small
birds; the robin comes next.

_To eat it a la Brillat-Savarin._--Take hold of the bird by the bill;
open your mouth wide enough to introduce the whole bird into it easily;
then shut it, at the same time biting off the bill just at its base;
chew properly and swallow.

While the birds are roasting or baking, place as many small slices of
bread in the dripping or baking pan, and serve a bird over each slice.
Cut the slices either square, round, or oval, about one-fourth of an
inch in thickness, and large enough to hold the bird.

_Hunter-like._--Prepare small birds as described for quails,
hunter-like; it makes an excellent dish.

_In Salmis._--Roasted or baked small birds can be prepared in _salmis_
when cold. Many amateurs prefer small birds not drawn; that is, the crop
only is taken off, but nothing of the inside is disturbed; they pretend
that they have a better taste when cooked thus; of course, every one to
his taste.

_High-holders_, _lapwings_, _meadow-larks_, _plovers_, _rails_,
_robins_, _snipes_, _thrushes_, _woodcocks_, _woodpeckers_, and
_yellow-birds_ are prepared as above.

Small birds have a better flavor when cooked after being somewhat
seasoned than when cooked fresh, but they must not be tainted. As long
as the rump is stiff, they are good; if soft, they must be examined
carefully, as they might be tainted. When young, there is no stiffness
in the legs. Small birds are generally put by the half dozen on the
same skewer, as seen in the cut (p. 278); but when a little larger, like
the robin or plover, they may be trussed as directed for snipes.

_Grouse or Heathcock._--These are good as long as the legs are flexible;
if not, examine them carefully, they might be rotten inside.

Lard them well, envelop each in buttered paper, and place on the spit
before a good fire; baste often, remove the paper after twenty or
twenty-five minutes; leave two or three minutes more, basting
continually with the drippings; dish the birds; mix with the drippings a
few drops of lemon-juice, and a little salt and pepper, and serve with
the birds.

_Baked._--Lard the bird as for roasting; that is, the fleshy parts only
are larded with salt pork, then truss them as directed for chicken,
place them in a baking-pan, cover the bottom of the pan with cold water,
put a piece of buttered paper on each bird, place in a hot oven, baste
often till done. Serve with the gravy some water-cress, and lemon-juice,
or vinegar.

It is also prepared, cooked, and served in the different ways described
for prairie-hen, either in _chartreuse_, _salmis_, salad, or any other
way.

_Hare._--No hares have yet been found in the United States, except in
California. The reported hare of the Western prairies is, as far as
known, a species of rabbit. That found in the Eastern markets comes from
Canada and Europe. The Canadian hare is very inferior in quality.

_To select._--When young it has rather soft paws, and not much opened,
and also soft ears; but if old, the paws are hard and much worn, and the
ears stiff and hard. If fresh, the body is stiff; it is soft, and the
flesh is nearly black, if tainted. Save the blood as much as possible;
it improves the sauce very much.

_In Civet._--When the hare is cleaned as directed for game, cut in
pieces. Have in a saucepan and on a good fire two ounces of butter and
one of salt pork cut in dice. Stir, and when the salt pork is fried take
it off the pan, and put the pieces of hare in it; stir with a wooden
spoon now and then, till of a fine golden color; then sprinkle on it a
teaspoonful of flour, add ten small onions, four sprigs of parsley, two
of thyme, two cloves of garlic, a bay-leaf, salt, pepper, about a pint
of claret wine, same of broth, three or four mushrooms, and a little
grated nutmeg; boil gently till done; dish the pieces of hare; throw
away parsley, thyme, bay-leaf, and garlic; mix the blood of the hare, if
any, in the sauce, boil it about ten minutes longer, turn it on the
hare, and serve warm.

Many epicures like a civet better when prepared one or two days in
advance, and only warmed before serving. When the civet is done, and
ready to serve, place the dish in a cool, dry place, and when you want
to eat the civet, place the dish in a _bain-marie_, or in an oven, and
serve when warm.

_The same, roasted._--Lard the hare well; place it on the spit before a
good fire; baste often with the drippings, and when properly cooked
serve it with the following sauce: put in a stewpan a piece of butter
the size of a walnut, and set it on a good fire; when melted, put in it
the hare's liver well pounded, then the blood, if any, also the
drippings, salt, pepper, a tablespoonful of white wine, same of broth,
and one teaspoonful of vinegar; when of a proper thickness, serve with
the hare.

It takes about an hour to roast it well.

In a small family, the hind part is roasted, and the fore part of the
hare is dressed in civet.

_Baked._--Lard it with salt pork and bake it, basting often: serve in
the same way as a roasted one.

_The same, next day._--If any is left from the day before, warm it and
serve, if in civet; cut in slices and serve cold, with an oil-sauce, if
roasted.

_Leveret._--Cook and serve like a hare.

A leveret may also be _sauted_ like a chicken.

_Pheasant, to select._--When young, the claws are short and round at the
end, while they are long and sharp when old. They are not fresh when the
rump is of a bluish color, but some amateurs like them then; in that
state, they are said to have a venison taste. Some hang the bird by the
feathers of the tail and leave it so till it falls; then they prepare
and eat it. It does not fall until very "high," or rather when tainted.
They ought not to be cooked when very fresh, as they have not as
delicate a taste then as when rather "high."

_Pheasants_ are prepared, cooked, and served like _prairie-birds_ in
every way.

_Crane, Ostrich, Peacock, Pelican, or other Large Birds._--These birds
are seldom eaten. When old, they are tough, and of a disagreeable taste.
When young, they are not so bad, and may be prepared like a turkey
stuffed or stewed.

_Prairie-bird, Prairie-hen, and Partridge._--An old prairie-hen has a
white bill and bluish legs; when young, the bill is of a rather
dark-gray color, and the legs are yellowish. As long as the rump does
not turn bluish, it is fresh enough.

_To prepare._--Clean and prepare a prairie-hen as directed for poultry
in general.

_Baked._--Clean and prepare the bird as directed, then cut off the claws
to about half their length. Truss the prairie-hen as directed for
chicken, and then cover its breast with a thin slice of fat salt pork,
but do not cover the back of the bird. Tie the salt pork with twine.
Place the prairie-hen on its back in the baking-pan, with a piece of
butter the size of a walnut on it; set it in a quick oven (about 400
deg. Fahr.), baste often, and serve when rather underdone. While the
bird is baking, prepare some fresh water-cress, place some of it all
around the bird; mix lemon-juice with the gravy and turn it over the
bird and water-cress, and serve warm. It may also be served after being
baked, the same as directed for a roasted one.

_Broiled._--Clean and prepare as directed, then split the back of the
prairie-hen so as to open it; salt, pepper, and butter it by means of a
brush; place it on the gridiron over a good fire; turn over three or
four times; as soon as done, sprinkle on it a little allspice, dish the
bird, spread a _maitre d'hotel_ sauce on it, and serve warm. It is also
served with a _piquante_, _poivrade_, or _ravigote sauce_.

_Another way._--Split the prairie-hen in two lengthwise so as to make
two equal pieces. Put one ounce of butter in a stewpan and set it on a
good fire; when melted, lay the two halves of the bird in; turn over and
leave them till a little more than half cooked, when take them off.
Envelop each piece in buttered paper, place them on the gridiron, and
set it on a rather brisk fire for about fifteen minutes, turning over
once only, and serve with the following sauce: Put with the butter in
the pan in which was the bird, about a teaspoonful of chopped parsley,
same of chopped mushrooms, salt, pepper, and a pinch of allspice;
sprinkle in and stir at the same time a teaspoonful of flour; add a gill
of white wine, same of broth; boil gently till of a proper thickness,
and serve the bird with it, either on the same dish or separately. Serve
as warm as possible.

_With Cabbage._--Clean and truss the prairie-chicken as directed for
birds; fry it a little with butter, just enough to color it; then place
a cabbage, previously blanched, cut in four pieces, all around it; also
about four ounces of lean salt pork, one onion whole; just cover the
whole with cold water (it requires about one pint of it if the pan is of
a proper size); when the cabbage is boiled down, baste occasionally with
the juice, and if it boils away add a little broth or water; keep enough
to baste till done, then dish the prairie-chicken with the cabbage
around, also the salt pork if liked; turn the juice all over through a
strainer. In case it is not salt enough, add salt while basting. The
flesh of a prairie-chicken is naturally dry, and by being cooked with
cabbage it is kept moist all the time and is juicy when done. For those
who have no prejudice against cabbage, it is the best way to prepare a
prairie-bird.

_Another way._--Lard two prairie-birds as directed for larding, after
being cleaned and prepared as directed. Put in a stewpan half a pound of
bacon cut in slices, with four onions, two carrots cut in pieces, a
small dried or Bologna sausage, two sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, two
cloves, a bay-leaf, a little grated nutmeg, and a cabbage cut rather
fine, and which is to be previously thrown in boiling water and boiled
ten minutes; then the two partridges or prairie-hens; place over the
whole four ounces of bacon cut in thin slices, cover with broth, set the
pan on a sharp fire, and when it has boiled about fifteen minutes,
subdue the fire, or put the pan in a moderately heated oven, simmer
about two hours if the partridges are old, and one hour if they are
young; then take from the fire, place the partridges on a dish with the
sausage cut in pieces around them, drain the cabbage and put it on
another dish with the bacon, strain the sauce on both dishes, and serve.

_In Chartreuse._--It is made in a mould for _Charlotte russe_, or in one
like the cut following. Clean the prairie-hen as directed for birds;
put it in a baking-pan with one ounce of butter spread on it, also salt
and pepper, and a gill of cold water in the pan, and bake till
underdone, when cut it in seven pieces, making three slices in the
breast, lengthwise. Peel and slice two carrots and two turnips; cut the
slices about an inch thick; then cut again in small round pieces, with a
fruit-corer, about half an inch in diameter; set them on the fire with
cold water and salt, boil gently till done, drain and turn immediately
in cold water, and they are ready to be used. Put a small head of
cabbage in a saucepan with half a pound of lean salt pork, just cover it
with cold water, and boil gently till done. The prairie-hen, carrots,
and turnips, and the cabbage, may be cooked at the same time, but
separately, as directed. When the cabbage is done, turn it into a
colander, cut it rather fine with a spoon, press gently on it to get the
water out as much as possible without mashing it through the colander,
and it is ready to be used. Butter the mould well; place slices of
boiled beets on the bottom; some letters or flowers may be cut in beet,
the intervals or holes filled with turnips and carrots; when the bottom
is lined with beets, carrots, and turnips, lay horizontally a row of
pieces of carrots all around and against the sides of the mould; place a
similar one of turnips on the carrots, and so on, the last row being as
high as the top of the mould. Then put a layer of the cabbage on the
bottom, about half an inch thick--that is, on the carrots, turnips, and
beets--place a like layer on the sides with a spoon; put the pieces of
prairie-hen in the middle, cover with a layer of cabbage, and bake about
fifteen minutes in an oven at about 350 deg. Fahr. The meat must not
touch the carrots or turnips, but be entirely surrounded with cabbage,
else it would crumble down in removing the mould. As soon as the mould
is taken out of the oven, place a dish over it and turn it upside down,
leave it so about ten minutes to allow the juice to come out, then
remove the mould carefully, and serve.

The cut below represents a _chartreuse_ made exactly like the one
described above, with the exception that instead of having a row of
carrots and a row of turnips, they are mixed, that is, placed
alternately, the white spots representing pieces of turnips and the
black spots pieces of carrots--the top being decorated according to
fancy.

According to the size of the mould, two, three, or more prairie-hens may
be prepared at one time and in the same mould.

[Illustration]

_Roasted._--Rub the stomach and legs of the birds with lemon, then
envelop those parts with slices of bacon tied with twine, or fixed with
small skewers; after which envelop the whole bird in buttered paper tied
with twine; place them on a spit before a good fire, take the paper off
after twenty or thirty minutes, according to the age of the bird; leave
two or three minutes longer, baste often during the process of roasting,
with the drippings; dish the birds without removing the slices of bacon;
mix in the gravy the juice of half a lemon, or half an orange, a little
salt and pepper, and serve it with the birds. It may also be served
with water-cress and lemon-juice or vinegar. When roasted or baked and
dished, place carpels of oranges all around, and serve.

A roasted or baked prairie-hen is also served with the following sauces:
anchovy, caper, Champagne, cranberry, and _ravigote_ or tomato, and
currant-jelly.

_With Mushrooms._--When roasted or baked, serve it with a garniture of
mushrooms. It is also served with a garniture of cauliflowers,
_financiere_, _Macedoine_, and of truffles.

_In Fricassee._--Prepare, cook, and serve it like chicken in
_fricassee_.

_In Crapaudine._--Proceed as for pigeons in _crapaudine_, the only
difference being that it takes a little longer to cook. It is also
prepared and served as a quail, _hunter-like_. It takes longer to cook
than a quail.

_Saute._--Clean, prepare, cut, cook, dish, and serve the prairie-bird as
a chicken saute.

_Stewed._--Clean, prepare, and truss the bird as directed. Put about one
ounce of butter and two ounces of fat salt pork, cut in dice, in a
saucepan, and set it on a quick fire; toss gently, and when the butter
is melted, put the bird in and brown it all around; then add four small
onions, half a carrot in slices, salt, and pepper; stir till the onions
and carrot are partly fried; then add half a pint of broth, same of
white wine, a bunch of seasonings composed of four or five stalks of
parsley, one of thyme, one bay-leaf, and a clove; boil gently till done;
dish the bird, turn the sauce over it through a strainer, and serve
warm. Thus stewed, it may be served with the following _purees_:
asparagus, beans, lentils, lima beans, mushrooms, and peas.

_Cold._--A whole bird or part of it left from the preceding day's
dinner, if it has been broiled, baked, or roasted, is prepared and
served in salad, like a chicken salad; or in _salmis_.

_Boned._--A boned prairie-bird makes an excellent dish and a most
nutritious and warming one. Persons having a phlegmatic constitution
ought to partake of it at least twice a week during hunting-time. Always
select a very fresh and fat bird to bone. Pick, bone, fill, cook, and
serve it as described for boned turkey. A prairie-hen is more easily
boned, when fresh, than an ordinary chicken. The addition of truffles
(about half a pound for one bird) makes it still richer and warmer.

_In Croquettes._--Prepare, cook, and serve as chicken croquettes.

_Quails._--A quail, like a prairie-bird, is old when it has a white bill
and bluish legs; when young, the bill is of a rather dark-gray color,
and the legs are yellowish. Quails are just the contrary of pheasants;
the more fresh they are when cooked, the better.

_To prepare._--When cleaned and prepared as directed for poultry, cut
off the end of the claws, and then truss it as a chicken, sprinkle salt
and pepper on the breast. Cut thin slices of fat salt pork, somewhat
square, and of a proper size to cover the breast of the bird, but not
the back. Tie it to the bird with two pieces of twine, then roast or
bake.

_Another way to prepare them._--When cleaned, prepared, and trussed as
above, envelop the bird with grape-vine leaves, then in thin slices of
salt-pork, and roast or bake them. They may also be enveloped in
buttered paper, after being prepared, instead of salt pork or grape-vine
leaves, or instead of both, but only to roast them; if baked, the
buttered paper is placed over the birds.

_Baked._--Place the birds on their backs in a baking-pan, with a piece
of butter the size of a hazel-nut on each, just cover the bottom of the
pan with cold water, and set in a quick oven (about 400 deg. Fahr.) and
baste now and then. When about half done, put the liver of the birds,
well pounded, in the baking-pan, and continue basting till done. While
the quails are baking, cut as many square slices of stale bread as you
have quails, about three inches broad and one-fourth of an inch thick;
fry them in hot fat, place them on the dish, place a quail with the
breast upward on each slice; remove the twine, turn the gravy over them
and serve warm. Water-cress may be placed between each bird, as well as
all around, and in the middle of the dish, with vinegar or lemon-juice
sprinkled all over. It must also be served warm.

_Hunter-like (au Chasseur)._--Clean and prepare as directed for birds.
Set a saucepan on the fire with two ounces of butter to melt, then put
in it four quails trussed as for roasting; turn them round in the pan to
color every side; add then half a dozen stalks of parsley, salt, pepper,
and nearly cover them with broth and white wine, half of each; boil
gently till done. Dish the quails, and put them away in a warm place.
Strain the sauce and put it back on the fire with a tablespoonful of
_meuniere_, boil rather fast till it commences turning thick, turn over
the quails and serve warm.

_Roasted._--When cleaned and prepared as directed, envelop the birds in
grape-vine leaves and salt pork, or in buttered paper, as directed
above, and place them on the spit before a moderate though good fire.
Have slices of roasted bread in the dripping-pan, baste often with the
drippings, and when done remove the twine, or the twine and paper, but
neither the salt pork nor the grape-vine leaves, and serve warm. The
slices of bread are placed on the dish, then a quail on each slice.
Water-cress may also be served as above.

Quails roasted with grape-vine leaves are considered one of the most
_recherche_ dishes. When about half roasted, the liver of the birds,
well pounded, is put in the dripping-pan, and the drippings are turned
over the birds when dished. When pounded, the livers may be spread on
the slices of bread before placing them in the dripping-pan.

_With Green Peas._--When the quails are roasted or baked, they may be
served with green peas _au jus_. They may also be served on a _puree_ of
celery or of mushrooms.

_In Chartreuse._--Proceed exactly as for a _chartreuse_ of prairie-bird.
Quails may be served in every way like prairie-hens, _stewed_, in
_salad_, in _salmis_, etc.

_Rabbit--to select._--A rabbit, like almost every other kind of game,
has a better taste when a little seasoned, but not too much so. As long
as the body is rather stiff, it is good; but when soft, and when the
flesh has a black-bluish appearance, it is necessary to examine it
carefully, as it might be tainted. A young rabbit has soft paws, and are
not much opened; but an old one has them open, hard, and worn out. The
ears of a young one are very soft, while those of an old one are stiff
and comparatively rough. The blood of the rabbit is a great improvement
when mixed with the sauce or gravy accompanying it when served;
therefore, we emphatically and earnestly ask of hunters, when they kill
rabbits, to place them in their game-bags in such a position that the
place where the shots have penetrated and through which the blood is
escaping, be upward, and consequently stop the spilling of it.

Tame rabbits, unless they have been kept in a large place, well fed,
free from any manure or dirt, and having also plenty of room to burrow
in a dry soil, are very seldom fit to eat.

_To lard._--The fleshy parts of a rabbit are larded with salt pork in
the same way as described for a fillet of beef.

_Baked._--To bake it, it may be larded or not, according to taste. When
cleaned and prepared as directed for game, place the rabbit in a
baking-pan, with a few slices of onion and carrot; salt, pepper, and
butter it; cover the bottom of the pan with cold water and set it in a
quick oven. After ten or fifteen minutes, turn the rabbit over, baste
and cover it with a piece of buttered paper. Continue basting till done.
When about half done, if the water and juice are boiling away or
absorbed, add more water or broth, and when done turn the gravy over the
rabbit through a strainer, and serve with water-cress and a few drops of
lemon-juice or vinegar.

It is also served with a _cranberry_, _fines herbes_, _mushroom_,
_piquante_, _ravigote_, _tomato_, and _truffle_ sauce.

_In Chartreuse._--A rabbit is prepared in _chartreuse_ the same as a
prairie-chicken; the only difference is, that it requires a larger
mould; the rest of the process is the same.

_In Civet, or stewed._--Cut the rabbit in pieces, and fry them with a
little butter till turning rather brown, when add half a pound of lean
salt pork cut in dice; stir and fry two or three minutes, stir in also a
tablespoonful of flour; one minute after add a half pint of broth, same
of claret wine, salt, twelve small onions, and a bunch of seasonings,
composed of three or four sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, a bay-leaf, a
clove of garlic, one clove. Boil gently till done; throw away the bunch
of seasonings, and serve warm. In case it is not handy to use claret
wine, use a gill of Madeira, or Port, or Sherry wine, and one gill of
water. Without wine at all it makes an inferior dish.

A civet made three or four days in advance, and warmed in a _bain-marie_
for ten minutes, once every day, is better than if eaten as soon as
made.

In case the sauce is becoming too thick, after warming the rabbit
several times, add a little broth, and also a little butter; stir
gently, and always serve as warm as possible.

_In Crapaudine._--When cleaned and prepared as directed, cook and serve
the rabbit as described for pigeon in _crapaudine_, with the exception
that it takes a little longer to cook.

_In Croquettes._--What may be left from the preceding day's dinner of a
baked, roasted, or stuffed rabbit, may be prepared in _croquettes_, in
the same way as chicken _croquettes_.

_With Currant-Jelly._--A rabbit served with currant-jelly makes a
sightly dish, but it requires care and taste. Skin the rabbit carefully,
leaving the ears unskinned. Cut the legs at the first joint, then dip
the ears in hot (but not boiling) water, and scrape off the hair
carefully. Draw it and wash the inside carefully also, putting away the
liver, heart, and lungs. Chop fine one middling-sized onion, and fry it
with about one ounce of butter; then add to the onion, and fry them
also, the heart, liver, and lungs of the rabbit, after being chopped
fine, when add a teaspoonful of chopped parsley, salt, pepper, nutmeg
grated, and a piece of clove also grated. Stir for about one minute,
take from the fire, mix with it two yolks of eggs and one ounce of
butter. Fill the rabbit with the mixture, sew up the incision made to
draw it, and then truss it in the following way: Put the rabbit on the
paste-board so that it appears as if it were resting, lying on its
belly. Skewer the ears so that they seem to be naturally bent on the
back of the neck. With a trussing-needle fasten the forelegs so that
they look also as if naturally bent by the animal when at rest. Roast or
bake it, and serve it with the gravy and _currant_ or _raspberry jelly_.

It is placed on the dish lying on its belly, the skewers and twine are
removed, and a few sprigs of parsley are placed in its mouth. The
currant-jelly may be served in a saucer and the gravy in another.

_In Gibelotte._--The only difference between a _gibelotte_ and a civet
is that the latter is made with claret wine and the former with Sauterne
or Catawba. Other white wine may be used, but the two kinds above
mentioned are the best.

_Marengo._--When cleaned and prepared as directed, cut the rabbit in
pieces; keep the head, neck, and trimmings, to make a potage _au
chasseur_, and cook and serve the rest as a chicken _a la Marengo_.

_In Papillotes._--The four legs and two pieces cut on both sides of the
backbone may be prepared, cooked, and served as veal cutlets in
_papillotes_. The rest is used to make a potage _au chasseur_.

_With Olives._--When baked or roasted, serve it as a duck with olives,
putting three dozen olives instead of two.

_Roasted._--It may be roasted with only a little butter spread all over
it, or enveloped in buttered paper; or larded with salt pork; or larded
and enveloped in buttered paper. It must be basted often, and if
enveloped with paper, the paper must be removed about fifteen minutes
before taking the rabbit from the fire. Ascertain when done by means of
a skewer or a small sharp-pointed knife. It takes about forty-five
minutes to roast, according to size and fire. When roasted it may be
served with its gravy or drippings only, or with a _cranberry_, _fines
herbes_, _mushroom_, _piquante_, _Provencale_, _ravigote_, _Tartar_,
_tomato_, _or truffle_ sauce.

_With Green Peas._--When baked or roasted, serve it with green peas _au
jus_.

_Saute._--When the rabbit is cleaned and prepared as directed, proceed
as for a chicken _saute_ in every particular.

_Sportsman-like._--Clean and prepare the rabbit, then cut off the neck,
head, and the end of the legs, which you keep to make a potage _au
chasseur_. Put the rest in a crockery vessel with the juice of a lemon,
salt, and pepper. Leave thus for at least one day, turning it over two
or three times. Then bake or roast it, and serve with the gravy and
water-cress.

_Stewed._--When cleaned and prepared, cut the rabbit in pieces. Put in a
saucepan three ounces of butter and set it on the fire; as soon as
melted, put the pieces of rabbit in, stir now and then till they are
turning rather brown, then take them from the pan but keep it on the
fire. Put in it a rather small carrot and two or three onions, both
sliced, a few slices of turnip, half a dozen sprigs of parsley, two of
celery, one of thyme, the last three tied together with twine, and two
or three cloves, also half a pint of Madeira or Sherry wine, salt, and
pepper; cover the whole with broth or water; boil gently till half done,
when add the rabbit, and continue boiling till the whole is done,
stirring once in a while. Dish the rabbit, mash the onions, carrot, and
turnip, through a colander, which you put all around the pieces of
rabbit, strain the sauce over the whole, and serve warm.

_Cold._--What is left is warmed and served, if from a civet, giblotte,
stewed, etc., and served with a _vinaigrette_, if from a roasted or
baked piece. It may also be served with a _piquante_, _poivrade_, or
_ravigote_ sauce.

_Snipe--to truss._--Prepare as directed for poultry. Cut the wings off
just above the second joint, as seen in the cut below. The head and legs
must be cleaned very carefully. By heating the lower part of the legs
and the claws, the skin can be easily removed, but this is not
necessary, they may be singed and washed only. Fold the legs and run the
bill of the bird through the two legs and the body. Put a slice of fat
salt pork on the breast of the snipe, which you fasten there with twine,
as seen in the cut below. The cut represents the bird on the spit, ready
for roasting.

[Illustration]

_Stewed._--Take four snipes and pound the livers, hearts, and lungs well
with about the same amount of fat salt pork; then add to them about a
teaspoonful of parsley chopped fine, and the yolk of an egg; divide the
mixture in four parts and put each part in a bird, which you sew and
truss as directed. Line the bottom of a stewpan with slices of salt pork
and lay the snipe on them; set on a slow fire for ten minutes, add about
half a pint of white wine, same of broth; simmer till done, dish the
birds, strain the gravy on them, sprinkle a few drops of lemon-juice
over the whole, and serve warm. Snipes are served in several ways, as
described for bobolinks and other small birds.

_Salmis._--A salmis is made with tame ducks and any kind of game birds.

Birds may be roasted or baked to make a _salmis_, but most generally it
is made with cold birds, that is, what is left from the previous day's
dinner. It is certainly the best way to make use of cold birds. The
proportions of the different seasonings are according to the proportion
of meat. We give below the proportions for a whole bird; it will be easy
to augment or reduce. Put two ounces of butter in a saucepan and set it
on the fire; as soon as melted stir into it a tablespoonful of flour;
when turning rather yellow add one pint of broth, same of claret wine, a
bunch of seasonings composed of four or five sprigs of parsley, one of
thyme, a bay-leaf and a clove, also salt, pepper, and a clove of garlic;
boil gently about thirty-five minutes. Strain the sauce into a saucepan.
Cut the bird or part of bird in pieces, the same as they are generally
carved; put them in the pan with the sauce; place the saucepan in a
_bain-marie_ till the meat is warm, add some lemon-juice, and serve.
While the meat is warming, cut some stale bread in _croutons_, fry them
with a little butter.

_To serve._--A _salmis_ is served in two ways: first, the _croutons_ are
placed on the dish, a piece of meat is put on each, and then the sauce
is poured all over; second, dish the meat and sauce, place the
_croutons_ all around the dish, with a piece of lemon or bitter orange
between each _crouton_. When the _croutons_ are served under the pieces
of meat, you must have as many as there are pieces; when served around
the dish, have enough of them, and of slices of lemon, to surround the
dish. The _croutons_ and slices of lemon are always placed around the
meat and on the border of the dish. The lemon or orange is first split
in two lengthwise, then cut in eight, twelve, or sixteen slices, always
commencing to cut on the inside and finishing by the rind. Chop fine the
bones, heart, and liver of the bird, and put them in the saucepan at the
same time with the broth. Truffles or mushrooms sliced may be added to
the sauce, if liked, but only when strained.

_Another._--Carve the bird or part of it, and serve cold with the
following sauce; pound the liver of the bird and put it in a saucer; add
to it a little vinegar, salt, pepper, and stir and mix the whole; then
add about three times as much oil as vinegar, mix again, then
lemon-juice, stir, and serve. It may be made without vinegar at all,
using lemon-juice instead of vinegar to mix at first.


  OPOSSUM, OTTER, RACCOON, SKUNK, FOX, WOODCHUCK, AND OTHER LIKE ANIMALS.

We cannot say that we have had much experience in cooking the above
animals, but they are all eaten by many persons, in different parts of
this and other countries. We have tasted of all or them except the
raccoon, and we must say that we found them palatable. It is well known
that when our soldiers retook possession of Ship Island, they found
plenty of raccoons on it, and ate all they could catch. One day we
happened to meet a sub-officer, who was there at the time, and inquired
of him about it. He said he had never eaten any raccoons before, and did
not know that they were eatable; but now he could eat them as readily as
rabbit, as they were quite as good.

The best time to eat any of the animals enumerated above is from
Christmas to the 15th of February.

_How to prepare them._--As soon as the animal is killed skin it, take
the inside out, save the liver and heart, and wash well with lukewarm
water and a little salt, inside and out; then wipe dry with a towel, put
inside a few leaves of sage, bay-leaves, mint, and thyme, and sew it up.
Hang it outside in a place sheltered from the sun, such as the northern
side of a building; leave it thus five or six days, then take off, and
cook.

_How to skin a Skunk._--We were hunting one day in New Jersey, northwest
of Paterson, with a friend and two farmers living there, when one of
them shot a skunk. We asked him how much he could get for the skin. He
said it was not worth while to take it to town, but that he would eat
the animal, as it was very good.

We thought at first that he was joking; but putting his gun and game-bag
to the ground, he looked at us earnestly, and said, "Gentlemen, you seem
to doubt; I will show you how it is done." We soon saw that we had been
mistaken.

We made a fire, took hold of the skunk by the head with one hand, and
with a stick in the other held the skunk over the fire. He burnt off
nearly all the hair, taking care to avoid burning the skin, commencing
at the hind legs; then with his hunting-knife he carefully cut off the
bag containing the fetid matter, and skinned and cleaned it.

We then examined the skunk, and although it had not been washed, we
could not find any part of it with a bad smell, and if we had not seen
the whole operation we certainly would not have thought that it was a
skunk, the very name of which is repulsive.

The following week we dined with the farmer, ate some of that identical
skunk, and found it very good.

_How to cook the above-named Animals._--Take out the leaves of sage,
etc., which you put in the animal before exposing it to the weather.
Pound well the liver and heart with about the same quantity of bacon,
then mix that with two or three teaspoonfuls of chopped parsley, a pinch
of grated nutmeg, salt, and pepper; stuff the animal with that mixture,
and also with six small onions fried in butter, and a bunch of seasoning
composed of four sprigs of parsley, three of thyme, two cloves, two
cloves of garlic, and two bay-leaves, and sew it up again. Butter it
well all over, place it on a spit before a very quick fire; put three or
four sage-leaves in the dripping-pan, and baste often with the
drippings. Serve it when cooked with the gravy, throwing away the
sage-leaves.

It may also be served with a _Mayonnaise_, _ravigote_, or _Tartar_
sauce.

_Squirrel._--A squirrel is prepared as a rabbit in every particular.


  VENISON.

If young, the hoof is not much opened, and the fat is thick and clear;
when old, the hoofs are wide open. To know if it is fresh enough, run a
knife or a skewer through the leg or through the shoulder, and if it
does not smell bad and stale, it is good. It is not as delicate when
fresh as when it has been killed for five or six days. If fresh when you
buy it, keep it from three to eight days before cooking it.

_To improve._--Put the piece of venison in a crockery vessel. For about
six pounds put a pint of vinegar in a saucepan with two bay-leaves, two
cloves, two cloves of garlic, one onion sliced, two stalks of thyme,
four of parsley, and twelve pepper-corns; set it on the fire, give one
boil, and turn over the piece of venison. Turn the piece of meat over
occasionally for one or two days, and then cook it.

_Another way._--Lard the piece of venison and put it in a crockery
vessel; spread all over two or three onions and a clove or two of garlic
(both sliced), half a gill of sweet-oil, same of claret wine, a pinch of
allspice, four cloves, and two sprigs of thyme; baste twice a day for
two or three days, and then cook.

_To bake._--Put the venison in a baking-pan with the seasonings in which
it has improved; spread some butter on it, and bake in a rather quick
oven; baste now and then, and turn over if necessary. When baked, serve
with a _ravigote_ sauce, to which you have added the gravy from the pan
in which it has been baked. Serve it also with a cranberry, _piquante_,
_Robert_, or _Tartar_ sauce, or with currant-jelly.

_In Civet._--Shoulder, neck, and breast-pieces are cut and prepared in
civet, in the same way as a civet of rabbit.

It may also be kept three or four days and warmed in a _bain-marie_; it
improves it as much as that of rabbit.

_With Mushrooms._--Any piece of venison, baked or roasted, may be served
with a garniture of mushrooms.

_Cutlets, broiled._--The cutlets are much better when improved as
directed. The seasonings are spread all over. They are then wrapped up
in buttered paper and broiled on a quick fire. They may also be larded
with salt pork, and then broiled with or without being enveloped in
paper. When broiled and dished, serve them warm with a _maitre d'hotel_
or _ravigote_ sauce.

_Sautees._--Put six cutlets in a stewpan, larded or not, with salt,
pepper, eight small onions, two carrots, four sprigs of parsley, two of
thyme, two cloves, a bay-leaf, a gill of broth, and same of water; set
it on a good fire and boil gently till cooked. Dish the cutlets so that
every small end or bone rests on the larger end of another, and serve
with the sauce strained on them. If more sauce is desired, add to it any
of the following: cranberry, _piquante_, _ravigote_, _Robert_, or
_Tartar_.

_Haunch, roasted._--After being improved, if liked, remove the thin skin
around it and lard it with salt pork; it may be roasted without larding,
but it is certainly an improvement, the meat being naturally dry. Place
it on the spit before a brisk fire and near it; baste with melted butter
first, and then with the drippings till done. If it is larded, it will
require less butter. As soon as a kind of crust forms around the meat,
remove it a little from the fire by degrees. Ascertain with a skewer or
small knife when done. Venison is generally served rather underdone,
when roasted or baked.

To make the dish more sightly, the skin and hair of the lower part of
the leg, together with the hoof, are left untouched. To prevent them
from burning while it is roasting, envelop these parts with a wet towel,
which you cover with several sheets of buttered or oiled paper. It may
be necessary to dip the towel in water two or three times during the
process of roasting. When roasted, serve with any of the following
sauces: cranberry, _piquante_, _poivrade_, _ravigote_, _Robert_, or
_Tartar_; also with currant-jelly. If served with the gravy only, add
water-cress and lemon-juice or vinegar.

_Baked._--Prepare it as directed for roasting; then place it in a
bakepan with a little cold water, just enough to cover the bottom of the
pan; sprinkle salt and pepper all over, spread some butter on the upper
side and put in a quick oven. Turn over and baste now and then till
done. If the water is absorbed, add more. When baked, serve with the
same sauces as if roasted, and also with currant-jelly and water-cress.

_Saddle._--Roast or bake the saddle, and serve it as directed for a
haunch, with the same sauces, and also with water-cress and
currant-jelly.

_Shoulder._--Cut the shoulder in fillets and lard them slightly. Put in
a stewpan four ounces of butter and set it on a brisk fire; when hot,
lay the fillets in, and when of a golden color add the seasonings in
which you have improved the saddle, or the same ones if you have not
done it; then subdue the fire, wet with a little warm broth, simmer till
cooked, dish the fillets, strain the sauce on them, and serve. It may
also be dressed entire, with the bones off; but it is more generally
done in fillets. It is boned like a shoulder of mutton, and roasted or
baked, and served like a haunch, with the same sauces and with
currant-jelly or water-cress.

_Stewed._--Cut the meat in square pieces, about two inches in size. Have
in a stewpan, and on a good fire, a piece of butter the size of a duck's
egg; when melted, sprinkle in, little by little, a tablespoonful of
flour, stirring the while with a wooden spoon; when getting rather
thick, add two ounces of bacon cut in dice, also half a pint of claret
wine, same of warm water, salt, pepper, a pinch of allspice, two
shallots chopped fine, or two green onions, four or five mushrooms, two
cloves of garlic, and six onions; then lay the meat on the whole, and
boil gently till cooked. Dish the meat, boil the sauce till of a
brownish color, skim off the fat if there is too much of it, take out
the cloves of garlic, turn the sauce on the meat, and serve hot.

_With Truffles or Mushrooms._--Any part of venison, baked or roasted,
may be served with a garniture of mushrooms, or one of truffles.

_Cold._--When you have some left for the next day, warm it before
serving it, if from a stew; but if from a roasted haunch, cut in slices
and serve cold with a _vinaigrette_.


  SNAILS.

A good many are now imported from Europe.

_How to clean and prepare._--Throw them in boiling water, in which you
have put some wood-ashes; leave them in till they have thrown their
cover wide open, which will take about fifteen minutes; then take them
off, pull them out of the shell by means of a fork, place them in
lukewarm water, and leave two hours; next, rub them in your hands, and
then soak in cold water; rub them again in your hands in cold water, two
or three times, changing the water each time, so as to take away most of
their sliminess. Wash the shells in lukewarm water with a
scrubbing-brush, and drain them when clean.

_Broiled._--Knead together and make a paste of a sufficient quantity of
butter, parsley chopped fine, salt, pepper, and grated nutmeg; say about
two ounces of butter, a tablespoonful of parsley, a saltspoonful of
salt, a pinch of pepper, and the same of nutmeg (for two dozen). Put a
piece of the above paste, the size of a kidney bean, in each shell, then
the snails, and at the top again the same quantity of paste; lay them
one by one close together, in a crockery or cast-iron kettle, the mouth
of the snails up, and not one upon another; cover the kettle well; set
it on a moderate fire, or in a moderately heated oven, and leave thus
till cooked, which is easily seen by the parsley beginning to turn
black, or as if fried. Lay them on a dish in the same order, and if
there is any gravy in the kettle, put a part of it in each shell, and
serve hot.

In eating them, be careful after having taken off the snail and eaten
it, to turn down the shell, for there is some juice in the bottom of it
which is delicious; the best way is to drink it as if from the bottom of
a glass.

They can be broiled on a gridiron, but they are not as good as in a
kettle; some of the juice is lost, and also the flavor.

_Stewed._--Put in a stewpan four ounces of butter for fifty snails, and
set it on a good fire; when melted, sprinkle in it a teaspoonful of
flour, stirring a while; then add a teaspoonful of parsley chopped fine,
two sprigs of thyme, a bay-leaf, a pint of white wine, and then the
snails, which you have previously put back into their shells; cover the
whole with warm broth, boil gently till the sauce is reduced and the
snails are cooked, and serve them mouth upward, and filled with the
sauce.




  VEGETABLES.


Green vegetables must look fresh, and have nothing rotten about them.

_To boil or blanch Green Vegetables._--Whatever they are, spinach, green
peas, asparagus, etc., put some cold water and a little salt on the
fire; clean the vegetable, wash it if necessary, then drop it in the
water at the first boil; keep boiling for a time or till done; drain,
and immediately drop it in cold water; drain again before using. It is
impossible to tell how long it takes to boil; it depends entirely on the
nature of the vegetable: for instance, spinach, as well as peas or any
other vegetable, according to how tender it is, may take from three to
twenty minutes to cook properly. Dry vegetables, such as beans, peas,
lentils, etc., are washed or soaked in cold water, drained, and then set
on the fire with cold water and no salt. Salt renders beans much harder
and retards their cooking. Other vegetables that are neither green nor
dry, such as carrots, turnips, etc., are generally set on the fire with
cold water and salt. If prepared in other ways, it is explained in the
receipts.

Potatoes are generally steamed; when they must be boiled, it is
explained. We recommend to drop the green vegetables in the water at the
first boil, because, in boiling, water evaporates its gases and alkali,
and is therefore inferior for cooking purposes. Green vegetables are
more acid here than in Europe, on account of the newness and richness of
the soil; so is some fruit.

_Artichokes_.--The artichoke we refer to here is the plant somewhat
resembling a thistle, having a large, scaly head, like the cone of the
pine-tree; the lower part of the leaves composing the head, with the
broad receptacle underneath, is the eatable part. It is a native of
Sicily, and is an excellent and delicate vegetable. It grows well here,
and the reason why it is not more generally known is because some
persons who are used to live on coarse food have underrated it--their
palates not being fit to appreciate its delicate flavor. We recommend
gardeners and farmers to cultivate it; they will find a ready market.

_How to eat them raw_.--Quarter them, take off the outer leaves and
choke, and serve with oil, vinegar, mustard, salt, and pepper.

_How to cook_.--Clean them and take off the outer leaves, throw them
into boiling water, with parsley, salt, and pepper (they are cooked when
the leaves come off easily), then take from the fire and drain, taking
care to put them upside down.

_The same, fried_.--When cooked as above, cut the upper part of the
leaves, and then cut them in eight pieces, take the choke off, dip each
piece in a thin paste made of flour, sweet-oil, beaten egg, vinegar,
salt, and pepper, and fry them with a little butter. Serve them with
sprigs of fried parsley around.

_The same, stewed_.--When cooked as directed above, cut them in four
pieces, and trim off the upper part of the leaves, take off the choke,
and lay them in a stewpan; cover them with broth and set on a moderate
fire; add then one ounce of butter for six artichokes, one sprig of
parsley, and two mushrooms cut in slices; boil ten minutes, take the
parsley off, and serve the artichokes with the mushrooms around; pour
the sauce on the whole.

_In Vinaigrette._--Cook, and serve with a _vinaigrette_. The Jerusalem
artichokes are dressed like potatoes.

_Asparagus._--This is thought to be a native of Asia. The white
asparagus sells dearer than the other kinds, but we cannot say that it
is on account of its better quality, it is most likely for being more
sightly when served. If it is kept for some time before boiling it,
place the bunch in about half an inch deep of cold water, the top
upward, and keep in a cool place. There are only four ways of preparing
asparagus without changing or destroying the natural taste of the plant.
The large ones, or what is called the first cut, is prepared in
_vinaigrette_, _white sauce_, and _fried_; the small one, or second cut,
is cooked _en petits pois_--like green peas. It is better and has more
taste when boiled rather underdone, that is, taken from the water when
still firm; if boiled till soft, it loses its taste and is not crisp.

_To boil._--Cut off some of the white part, so as to have the whole of
one length if possible; then scrape the white end a little, soak in cold
water for a few minutes, and drain. Tie it in small bunches of half a
dozen or a dozen, according to size, and drop them in boiling water and
a little salt, at the first boil of the water. Boil till rather
underdone, take off, drain and drop in cold water immediately. Drain
again, and it is ready to serve.

_En Petits Pois._--Cut small asparagus in pieces about half an inch
long, and blanch them for three minutes. Take off and drain; then put
them in a saucepan on the fire with two or three tablespoonfuls of
broth, stir now and then for about two minutes, add a teaspoonful of
flour; stir again, and as soon as mixed with the asparagus add also
about one ounce of butter, salt, pepper, and chopped parsley, stir, and,
when the butter is melted, serve.

_Fried._--Blanch the asparagus two minutes, drain it; dip each in batter
and fry in hot fat. Take off with a skimmer when done; and turn into a
colander, salt it, and serve hot.

_In Vinaigrette._--Boil it as directed. When cold, serve with a
_vinaigrette_. (This is also called _a l'huile_.)

_With White Sauce._--While it is boiling, make a white sauce; drain the
asparagus and serve both, sauce and vegetable, warm. The asparagus is
not dropped in cold water.

_With Cream Sauce._--It is prepared and served as with a white sauce.

_In Omelet._--Boil the asparagus as directed, and when cool cut it in
small pieces about half an inch long, and when the omelet is ready to be
folded in two, a little while before taking from the fire, place the
asparagus in the middle, then fold and serve the omelet as if there were
nothing in it.

_Green or String Beans_, _Dwarf or Snap Beans_, _French Haricots_, _Pole
Beans_, _Kidney Beans_, _etc._--_To prepare them when green and cooked
with the pods._--Remove the string or thread that is on both sides, by
partly breaking one end of the pod and pulling lengthwise, repeat the
same for the other side; cut them in pieces half an inch long, soak them
in cold water, and throw them into boiling water with a little salt.
Boil them till cooked, which you will know by pressing one between your
fingers to see if tender; take them from the fire, throw them into cold
water to cool, and drain them.

_Au jus._--Cook a quart of beans. Put two ounces of butter in a stewpan
and set it on the fire; when melted, put the beans in with a teaspoonful
of chopped parsley; stir five minutes; then add a gill of broth, salt,
and pepper; simmer twenty minutes, and, just on taking from the fire,
mix in it two well-beaten yolks of eggs, with the juice of half a lemon,
and serve.

_Maitre d'hotel._--Put in a stewpan two ounces of butter, and set it on
a good fire; when melted, put in it a quart of beans cooked in water,
with a pinch of grated nutmeg, half a pint of milk, salt, pepper, and a
teaspoonful of chopped parsley; keep stirring continually, boil ten
minutes, take from the fire, mix in it two beaten yolks of eggs, and
serve.

_The same, with Onions._--Put two ounces of butter in a stewpan and set
it on the fire; when hot, put in it two onions cut in slices, and fry
them. Then add salt, pepper, a pinch of grated nutmeg, a saltspoonful of
chopped parsley, and a quart of beans cooked in water; also half a pint
of boiling water; boil ten minutes, stir with a wooden spoon, take from
the fire, sprinkle in it a few drops of vinegar, and serve.

_The same, in Salad._--Cook the beans in water, as directed above; then
put a layer of them in a crockery vessel, the layer to be about one inch
thick; then sprinkle on it salt and pepper; repeat the same process till
all your beans are in; cover and leave thus three or four hours; then
throw away the water, or drain if convenient; place the beans in a
salad-dish, with the sweet-oil, vinegar, and parsley necessary; move
like a salad, and serve cold.

_Green, shelled, Lima, or other Beans._--Shell the beans, throw them in
boiling water with a little salt, and when cooked drain them. Put two
ounces of butter for a quart of beans in a saucepan, and when melted
put the beans in with salt and pepper; toss gently now and then for
three or four minutes, then add about a teaspoonful of vinegar, or the
juice of half a lemon, and half a teaspoonful of parsley chopped. Mix
and serve warm. They may also be prepared as string-beans, either _au
jus_, in _maitre d'hotel_, or in _salad_.

_Dry Beans, Lima, White or Colored._--Dry beans must be soaked in water
for some time. Some require to be soaked twenty-four hours, others only
five or six hours. Those that require to be soaked long are not from the
last harvest, but have been kept for two or more years. If you are not
sure that the beans (especially the white) are from this year's crop,
soak them for twenty-four hours in cold water, and then drain them.

_To boil._--Put the beans in a saucepan with cold water, and boil gently
till tender. If the water boils away, fill up with cold water, but never
put any salt to boil dry beans, it prevents them from cooking. As soon
as boiled tender, drain them, and they are ready for use.

_Au jus._--When boiled as above, set them on the fire in a stewpan with
a few tablespoonfuls of gravy or broth, salt, and a little butter, stir
for two or three minutes, then add a little chopped parsley, and serve
warm.

_Maitre d'hotel._--When boiled as above, drain and put them in a
saucepan with about three ounces of butter for a quart of beans, stir
now and then, and when the butter is melted, add salt, pepper, a
teaspoonful of chopped parsley, and a few drops of vinegar; just mix and
serve.

_With Salt Pork._--Boil a quart of beans as directed above, and drain
them. Cut in dice about half a pound of bacon and put it in a saucepan
on the fire; when about half fried add the beans, mix and stir for one
minute, then put in a warm oven for about twenty minutes, stirring
occasionally; when done, sprinkle on it some parsley chopped fine,
pepper and salt to taste, if not salt enough. There are several ways of
preparing "pork and beans," but the one we give above is the most
general in New England. The pork must neither be too fat nor too lean.
It may be done also with ham and fresh pork.

_With Mutton._--Boil as directed about three pints of white beans and
drain them. When the leg of mutton is about half roasted, put the beans
in the dripping-pan, and stir occasionally till the meat is done, and
serve them with it. It makes a very nourishing dish, but it would be
rather heavy for persons having sedentary avocations. Two quarts of
beans would not be too much for a good-sized leg of mutton. It may also
be prepared with any other piece of mutton; shoulder, saddle, etc.

_Boiled with Mutton or Pork._--Prepare a quart of beans as directed, and
then boil them ten minutes and drain them. Cut in rather large dice
about two pounds of breast or neck of mutton or the same of pork, and of
the same pieces, and put meat and beans in a stewpan, cover well with
cold water; season with a bunch of seasonings composed of five or six
sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, a bay-leaf, and two cloves, salt,
pepper, a little nutmeg grated, a carrot cut in three or four pieces,
two onions, and a piece of turnip. Boil gently till the whole is
thoroughly cooked; remove the seasonings, and serve meat and beans
together. This makes also a nourishing dish and not an expensive one.
The nutritive qualities of beans are very well known, and very much
exaggerated too. Even Professor Liebig once said that "four quarts of
beans and two pounds of corned beef or pork boiled to rags, in fifty
quarts of water, will furnish a good meal for forty men."

We must say that we have not been able to try the experiment, but we
should like very much to see what kind and how much work forty men would
do, and for how long, with such a diet. There are many things that look
or seem well, and even magnificent in theory, though entirely
impracticable. It sounds well, especially to those who do not understand
the meaning of it, to say that we feed mostly on gluten, albumen,
gelatine, etc., and that we require so many ounces of carbon, oxygen,
etc., in twenty-four hours. Every thing that we eat may be, with the
exception of salt, turned into charcoal; but no one has yet been known
to feed on it.

_Colored Beans, stewed._--Soak, boil five minutes, and drain a quart of
beans. Put in a stewpan half a pound of bacon and set it on the fire;
five minutes after, put the beans in, with four small onions, salt, and
pepper, boil gently till cooked, and drain. Put two ounces of butter in
a stewpan on the fire; when melted, sprinkle in it a teaspoonful of
flour, same of chopped parsley, then the beans, without the bacon and
onions; toss now and then for ten minutes, then add half a pint of
claret wine, the same of the water in which they were cooked, boil
gently twenty minutes; then put in it also the bacon and onions, boil
five minutes longer, and serve the whole on the same dish.

_Beets, stewed._--Clean and wash well, but do not skin them. Put in a
crockery vessel a layer of rye straw, moisten it slightly, place the
beets on it, cover the vessel, and place it in a slow oven for five or
six hours; cool and skin them. When cooked, cut them in thin slices. Put
butter in a stewpan, and when melted sprinkle in it a pinch of flour, a
teaspoonful of chopped parsley, salt, and pepper, then the beets; simmer
twenty minutes, add a few drops of vinegar, and serve.

_Cabbages--to boil._--Take off the outer leaves, clean, cut in four
pieces, free it from stump and stalk, and drop it in boiling water with
a little salt and a piece of charcoal. Boil slowly till tender, and
drain. Cabbage contains some sulphur, and evaporates an unpleasant odor
while boiling, and especially while boiling fast. By putting a piece of
charcoal in the pot, it does not smell as much.

_With Bacon._--When boiled and drained, put the cabbage in a stewpan
with bacon, sausage, and a piece of breast of mutton; cover with cold
water, season with three or four sprigs of parsley, a carrot, a clove, a
little nutmeg, salt and pepper; boil till the whole is well cooked,
remove the seasonings and drain; dish the cabbage, put the meat on it,
and serve warm.

_With Milk, or a la Creme._--Boil and drain the cabbage as directed
above. Put two ounces of butter in a saucepan, set it on a good fire,
and when melted put the cabbage in with salt and pepper. Sprinkle on it
a teaspoonful of flour, add half a pint of cream or good milk; keep
stirring with a wooden spoon during the whole process; boil gently till
the sauce is reduced, and serve warm.

_Stewed._--Boil and drain two large heads of cabbage, and cut them very
fine. Put about three ounces of butter in a saucepan on the fire, and
when melted put the cabbage in and stir for five minutes; then add salt,
pepper, and a pinch of flour; wet with a pint of broth, boil till cooked
and the sauce reduced, then serve warm.

_A l'Allemande._--Blanch for ten minutes some white or green cabbage and
drain it. Put six ounces of salt pork, cut in dice, in a saucepan on the
fire, and when partly fried put two or three small heads of cabbage in,
stir, and when done, add a little gravy, and serve warm.

_With Apples._--Blanch for about ten minutes a head of cabbage and
drain it. Put two or three ounces of butter in a saucepan on the fire,
and put the cabbage in when the butter is melted with four or five
apples peeled, quartered, and cored; also a little salt and a little
sugar, about half a pint of water or broth, boil gently till done, and
serve as warm as possible. Generally, cabbages are better when prepared
at least one day in advance, and then warmed in a _bain-marie_ before
serving; a little butter may be added while it is warming. Any kind of
cabbage is prepared as directed in the above ways.

_Red Cabbage in Salad._--Take a hard head of red cabbage, and when all
the outer leaves are removed, see if it is clean, but do not wash it; if
a cabbage is not clean, do not use it for salad (as you want a hard one,
and a hard one is always clean when the outer leaves are taken off).
Then cut it in four pieces, trim off the stump and coarse ends of the
leaves; cut it as thin as possible, as in making sour-krout, put it in a
crockery vessel, with salt, vinegar, and pepper sprinkled on, cover and
leave thus from four to six hours; then throw away the water or vinegar,
dress as another salad, with oil and vinegar, and serve.

_The same, stewed._--Blanch the cabbage for about ten minutes and drain
it; then put it in a saucepan with about an ounce of butter and stir for
five minutes, when add a little salt, a little sugar, a gill of claret
wine, and same of broth or water. Boil gently till done, and serve.

_Stuffed._--Remove the outer leaves of either a green, white, or red
cabbage, see that it be clean, then put it in a bowl, and pour boiling
water on it. Leave it so till the leaves are soft and pliable, when take
off and drain. Cut off the stump carefully, place the cabbage on the
table, the top upward, then open it gently by spreading the leaves all
around without breaking them; then, commencing with the centre leaves,
put some sausage-meat between the leaves, finishing with the outer ones
and raising them; that is, bringing the cabbage to its original shape as
much as possible, and then tie it all around with twine. Put in a
saucepan large enough to hold the cabbage easily, but not too large, a
little salt pork, cut in small dice, rind of salt pork and trimmings of
butcher's meat that you may have, but if none at all, put a little lean
salt pork or bacon, and cut in dice also, half a carrot in slices, two
onions in slices also, and then the cabbage on the whole. Half cover it
with broth; water may be used instead of broth, but it makes a very
inferior dish, while with broth it is unquestionably an excellent one
for those who like cabbages. Simmer for two or three hours, according to
the size of the cabbage. A piece of sausage may be placed on the cabbage
also and cooked with it. Then dish the cabbage, remove the twine tying
it; place the sausage around and also the salt pork if liked, strain the
sauce on the whole, and serve warm. If the water or broth boils away
while it is cooking, add more.

_Sour-krout._--Soak in cold water for some time, changing the water
three or four times; then put it in a stewpan with a pound of bacon, two
ounces of sausages, and two ounces of lard to every quart of sour-krout,
salt, and pepper; wet with broth, or with water, boil from five to six
hours, and serve with the bacon and sausages on it. When cooked as
above, but with water instead of broth, drain it well, put the bacon and
sausages away in a warm place; then put the sour-krout in a stewpan with
about one pint of white wine to a quart of sour-krout, set it on the
fire and boil gently till the wine is nearly all absorbed or boiled
away. Serve as above with the bacon and sausages on it. It is almost
always prepared with wine in many parts of Germany.

_Cardoons._--The white part only is good to eat. Clean well and scrape
the sides; cut in pieces two inches and a half in length, and throw them
in boiling water with a little salt; boil them till their sliminess
comes off easily; then take from the fire, pour cold water in, and by
means of a towel remove the sliminess; soak in cold water and drain
them. Lay a few slices of bacon in a stewpan, place the cardoons on
them, and again lay slices of bacon on; season with two onions, two
sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, a bay-leaf, and a clove, salt, pepper,
and the juice of half a lemon; cover with water and set on a good fire;
boil till cooked; take from the fire and drain the cardoons only,
throwing away the seasonings. Put the cardoons back in the stewpan, in
which you have left the bacon; add two or three tablespoonfuls of broth,
and two of Espagnole sauce; set on a slow fire, and simmer till the
sauce is reduced to a proper thickness. Have at the same time in a pan
on the fire a piece of ox-marrow, and when melted mix it with the sauce
at the moment you take the cardoons from the fire, and serve hot either
with or without the bacon.

_Carrots--how to clean and prepare them._--Trim off all the small roots,
wash them well, scrape them gently, taking care to scrape the skin only;
then wash well, drain, and cut them either in slices a quarter of an
inch thick, in fillets or strips, or with a vegetable spoon, according
to fancy.

_To boil._--When prepared, put them in a saucepan with a little salt,
more cold water than is necessary to cover them, set on the fire, boil
gently till tender, and drain. It is impossible to tell how long it
takes, as it depends how young and tender they are.

_In Bechamel._--Clean, cut, and boil about a quart of carrots as
directed and drain them. Mix well together in a saucepan, on the table,
about two ounces of butter with a tablespoonful of flour, add about one
pint of milk, set on the fire, stir slowly till it comes to a boil, when
turn the carrots in, stir for about one minute, add also a little salt,
same of sugar, two yolks of eggs; stir and mix well, give one boil, and
serve warm.

_A la Creme, or with Cream._--Proceed as for a _Bechamel_ in every
particular except that you use cream instead of milk.

_In Poulette._--Proceed as in _Bechamel_ with the exception that you use
broth instead of milk, and add a little parsley, chopped fine, just
before serving.

_Fines Herbes._--Clean, cut, and boil as directed, about a quart of
carrots. Set a saucepan on the fire with two ounces of butter in it, and
when melted fry in it a piece of onion chopped fine. When the onion is
fried add a pint of broth or water; boil about five minutes, put the
carrots in with a teaspoonful of chopped parsley, give one boil, take
from the fire, add a few drops of lemon-juice, and serve as warm as
possible, with salt to taste.

_Au jus._--Proceed as for _fines herbes_, except that you do not use
onions, and put half a pint of broth or gravy.

_Glazed._--Clean, cut with a vegetable spoon, and boil as directed,
about a quart of carrots, and drain them. Put three ounces of butter in
a frying-pan and set it on the fire. As soon as the butter is melted
turn the carrots in, toss gently for five or six minutes, then add a
little over a gill of rich gravy, sugar to taste, toss again now and
then till the gravy is half boiled away, and use. Glazed carrots are
seldom served alone, but most generally used as garnishing around a
piece of meat.

_Stewed._--Clean, and cut carrots in slices, and then blanch them for
about five minutes, and drain them. Set a stewpan on the fire with about
two ounces of butter in it; as soon as melted put the carrots in with
salt, pepper, a pinch of sugar, half a pint of broth; boil gently till
cooked, take from the fire, add and mix with the carrots a little
chopped parsley, and serve warm.

_With Sugar._--Clean and slice about a quart of carrots, and blanch them
for five minutes, and then drain them. Put two ounces of butter in a
stewpan, and set it on a good fire, and when melted lay the carrots in
with salt, pepper, a pinch of grated nutmeg, and about half a pint of
broth; sprinkle in it, while stirring with a wooden spoon, about a
teaspoonful of flour, and boil gently till cooked. Take from the fire,
mix a good tablespoonful of sugar with two yolks of eggs, and those
again with the rest, and serve.

_Cauliflowers and Broccoli--how to prepare and cook them in
water._--Clean and wash them well, throw into boiling water with a
little salt and a little flour, boil till cooked, and drain them.

_How to serve with Cheese._--Put them on a crockery dish when prepared;
pour on a white sauce, in which you have mixed a little grated cheese;
then dust the whole with fine bread-crumbs; after which you take a soft
brush or a feather, which you dip in lukewarm butter, and put a thin
coat of it all over the cauliflowers; then place the dish in a quick
oven for ten minutes, and serve as they are, _i. e._, in the dish in
which they have been cooked. This is also called _au gratin_.

_In Bechamel._--Boil the cauliflowers till done to your taste, drain
immediately and place them on the dish, the top upward. While it is
boiling make a _Bechamel_ sauce and turn it over the cauliflowers as
soon as dished, and serve as warm as possible. Cauliflower, like
asparagus, has a better taste when rather underdone; it is more crisp.

_Au Beurre Noir (with Brown Butter)._--When boiled, drained, and dished,
turn a brown butter over them, and serve warm.

_With a Cream-Sauce._--Clean, prepare, boil, and drain the cauliflowers
as directed above, then dish them also with the top upward. While they
are boiling, make a cream-sauce and turn it over the cauliflowers as
soon as they are dished, and serve warm. As they must be served warm, if
the sauce is ready before the cauliflowers are cooked, keep it in a
_bain-marie_; if the cauliflowers are cooked before the sauce is ready,
keep them in a warm place.

_With a White Sauce._--Proceed as with a cream-sauce in every
particular, turning a white instead of a cream-sauce over them; serve
warm.

_Fried._--Clean, prepare, and boil them for about five minutes, that is,
till they are about half cooked; then dip them in batter for frying
vegetables, and fry them in hot fat. Take them off with a skimmer, turn
them into a colander, sprinkle salt all over, and serve as hot as
possible. They are excellent fried, but they must not be allowed to
cool.

_With a Tomato-Sauce._--Commence by making a tomato-sauce, as it
requires longer than preparing the cauliflowers. When the sauce is
nearly made, boil the cauliflower as directed, dish it, and then turn
the sauce over it, and serve warm.

_Au jus, or stewed._--Prepare, boil the cauliflowers till half done, and
drain them. Place them carefully in a stewpan, the top upward, and set
on the fire with a little fat. The fire must be rather slow. Stir gently
and very carefully in order not to break them, and, about five minutes
after they are on the fire, add half a gill of broth for a
middling-sized cauliflower, salt, and pepper; simmer till done, stirring
now and then during the process; dish them, turn the sauce all over, and
serve warm.

_In Salad._--When boiled and drained, leave them in the colander till
perfectly cold, then put them in the salad-dish with salt, pepper,
vinegar, and oil, move carefully in order not to break it, and serve. A
salad of cauliflowers is not served as a salad of greens, but as an
_entremet_, like other vegetables, and as if prepared in any other way.
It is an excellent dish for breakfast.

_Celery--stewed._--Cut off the green part or top of about half a dozen
heads of celery; cleanse and trim them, but leave them whole. Set a
saucepan of cold water and a little salt on the fire, and at the first
boil drop the heads of celery in, boil till tender and drain. Put the
celery back in the pan with about half a pint of broth; boil gently
about five minutes, when add two or three tablespoonfuls of good
meat-gravy, a teaspoonful of _meuniere_, salt to taste, give one boil,
and serve warm.

_Fried._--Cut the celery in pieces about two inches long, wash, drain,
and wipe dry. Dip them in batter for frying vegetables, drop in hot fat,
and turn them into a colander when fried; sprinkle salt over, and serve
hot. Soup or turnip-rooted celery, after being cleaned and properly
scraped, is prepared like table celery as above, either stewed or fried.

_Chiccory._--Chiccory, or succory, or endive, is generally prepared as a
salad, if it be that with the broad leaves, or the curled endive.

_Stewed._--Clean, wash, and drain it. Blanch it for about one minute,
and drain again. Then put it in a stewpan with a little broth, and
simmer till cooked; then add a little gravy, salt and pepper to taste,
and serve. It makes a good _entremet_. The wild chiccory is prepared in
the same way.

_With Milk._--Remove the outer leaves and see that it is perfectly
clean, cut in two or four, wash well in several waters, and throw into
boiling water with a little salt; boil half an hour, take it out, throw
into cold water, leave two minutes, and drain; press on it the drainer
so as to extract all the water from it, after which chop it fine. Put
about two ounces of butter in a stewpan; when melted, sprinkle in it a
teaspoonful of flour, also salt and pepper; then put the endive in, say
three or four heads, stir with a wooden spoon for ten minutes, after
which time you beat two eggs with milk, and put them in the stewpan;
keep stirring fifteen minutes longer, and serve.

_Corn--sweet._--The simplest and best way is to boil it, and then eat it
with butter, salt, and pepper. When boiled with any meat-soup, or with
_pot-au-feu_, it is delicious to eat, and gives a good taste to the
broth; it is also eaten with butter, salt, and pepper, as above.

_Stewed._--Shell it and then drop it in boiling water and a little salt,
boil till nearly done; then drain and put it back on the fire with a
little broth; boil gently for about ten minutes, add a little gravy,
salt and pepper to taste, and serve warm.

_In Succotash._--This popular Indian dish, is very simply made by
boiling corn and green Lima beans together, with salt and pepper. The
two can be prepared together as stewed corn, but it makes a very
inferior dish.

_Cucumbers._--Peel them, split them in four, take the seeds out, cut in
pieces about one inch long, throw them into boiling water, with a little
salt; boil till cooked, drain, and put them on a towel so as to dry
them well; then put butter in a frying-pan, and set it on a good fire;
when hot, put in it some chopped parsley, salt, and pepper, two minutes
after put the cucumbers in it, fry a few minutes, tossing them now and
then, and serve.

_The same, stewed._--Cook in boiling water, and dry them as above; then
put them in a stewpan with a little butter kneaded with flour, add salt,
pepper, and a pinch of grated nutmeg; moisten with broth, simmer to
reduce the sauce; take from the fire, mix the yolks of two eggs in the
sauce; add to it a few drops of vinegar, and serve them.

_Stuffed._--Soak a piece of bread in cold water and then squeeze the
water out of it, the size to be according to how many cucumbers are to
be stuffed, or how large they are. Split large cucumbers in two,
lengthwise, remove the seeds and some of the fleshy parts inside, by
means of a small iron spoon. Put a little butter in a saucepan on the
fire, and when melted fry in it a piece of chopped onion. When the onion
is fried, put in the pan what you have removed from the inside of the
cucumbers, and which you have chopped a little, stir for about five
minutes, and then add the soaked bread, stir and mix well with the rest;
add also salt, pepper, a little grated nutmeg and a little gravy; stir
again for about one minute, take from the fire; fill the cucumbers, that
is, each half with the mixture; place them in a pan, the mixture upward;
dust with bread-crumbs, put a little butter on the top of each, and
bake. Before serving, a little gravy may be sprinkled all over; serve
warm.

_In hors-d'oeuvre._--Peel the cucumbers, cut them in slices slantwise,
and salt them for two or three hours. Drain them, and then season with
oil, vinegar, pepper, and parsley chopped fine.

Pickled cucumbers are served whole with small onions, also pickled, as a
_hors-d'oeuvre_.

_Dandelion._--Dandelion is a very healthy greens in the spring, either
cooked or raw. Clean and wash them well several times, as it nearly
always contains fine sand between the leaves; leave them in cold water
about two hours, and drain them; throw them into boiling water and salt;
boil twenty minutes if young, and thirty minutes if full grown; then put
them in a colander, press on them so as to extract all the water, after
which chop them fine; put about two ounces of butter in a stewpan, for
two quarts, and set it on a quick fire; when melted, sprinkle in it a
teaspoonful of flour, salt and pepper, then put the dandelion in, stir
for ten minutes, after which wet it with broth; keep stirring for about
fifteen minutes longer, and serve.

_Egg-Plant--broiled._--Split the egg-plant in two lengthwise, peel it
and remove the seed. Put it in a crockery vessel and sprinkle salt on
it; leave it thus nearly an hour, then take it off, dip it in egg beaten
with salt, pepper, and chopped parsley, then boil it; serve with a
_maitre d'hotel_ sauce.

_Fried._--Peel and cut in slices, lay the slices in a vessel, sprinkling
salt over every layer, and leave thus half an hour and drain. Dip the
slices in batter for frying vegetables, drop them in hot fat, and turn
them into a colander when fried; sprinkle salt all over, and serve.

_Saute._--Put the slices with salt half an hour in a vessel as directed
in the above. Drain them, and then fry them on both sides with a little
butter in a frying-pan. Serve warm, with salt and pepper to taste.

_Stuffed._--Proceed as for stuffed cucumbers in every particular.

_Hominy._--Hominy is prepared in different ways, some make it in cakes,
others like mush. The following is, however, the general way of
preparing it: boil it for about three hours with water or milk, also
butter, salt, and pepper; then mix with it some well-beaten eggs, fry or
broil, or even cook it in an oven, and serve for breakfast.

_Leeks._--Clean, wash, and drain; throw them in boiling water with a
little salt, boil fifteen minutes, and drain; press on them in the
drainer, so as to extract all the water, then chop them fine. Put two
ounces of butter in a stewpan; when melted, sprinkle in it a teaspoonful
of flour, salt, and pepper, then add the leeks. Stir with a wooden spoon
for ten minutes; after that beat two eggs with milk, and put them in a
stewpan; keep stirring fifteen minutes longer, and serve.

_Lentils._--This excellent vegetable, much superior to beans or peas, is
not generally known. Most of what we have here comes from Germany; a
little comes from France and Switzerland. Many persons think them much
dearer than beans or peas, not knowing that they swell three or four
times their size when soaked in water before cooking them. They are
prepared like dry beans in every way. A _puree_ of lentils is excellent
with almost every kind of meat, and it also makes a good potage. It has
all the nutritive qualities of the bean.

_Lettuce._--Cos lettuce, cabbage lettuce, butter lettuce, curled
Silesia, white or green lettuce, etc. Besides being served as salad, all
the above, when properly dressed, make an excellent _entremet_.

_To prepare._--Take off the outer leaves, that is, all those that are
too green or too hard, then clean and wash well, but without cutting it
off, or without detaching the leaves. To stew lettuce, select hard
heads, so that they can be cleansed without detaching the leaves. When
cleaned, drop the heads in boiling water and a little salt, boil about
five or ten minutes, according to how tender the lettuce is, and drain
dry.

_Stewed._--When cleaned and prepared, sprinkle on the top of each, salt,
pepper, and a little grated nutmeg; then tie each head with a string.
Place in a stewpan two or three slices of bacon, put the heads of
lettuce in, season with two sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, a bay-leaf,
and a clove, also salt and pepper; cover with water, and simmer about
two hours in an oven; then take them from the pan, drain, pressing on
them to extract all the water, and put them on a dish, the top upward.
Have butter in a stewpan, and on a good fire; when melted, sprinkle in
it a teaspoonful of flour, stirring with a wooden spoon; subdue the
fire, add a little milk, and stir and simmer ten minutes longer; take
from the fire, mix in the beaten yolks of two eggs, pour it on the
lettuce, which you have kept warm, and serve.

_Another way._--When prepared, chop it fine. Put in a stewpan, for four
heads of lettuce, three ounces of butter, and set it on the fire; when
melted, put the lettuce in with a little chopped chervil, stir now and
then till cooked; then sprinkle in it a pinch of flour, wet with broth,
boil ten minutes longer, keeping it stirred, and serve. (For a salad of
lettuce, see Salad.)

_Stuffed._--Proceed as for a stuffed cabbage.

_Mushrooms._--Preserved mushrooms are used for sauces only. The first
thing to consider very attentively in mushrooms is, not to eat any that
you do not know to be good to eat. There are so many kinds of good and
bad ones, that it is necessary to be very careful about even the edible
ones, or the ones known as such when young; it is better and safer
never to use them when old; they are considered old when the comb
underneath is black before picking, while when young it is of a pink
color.

_How to clean and prepare them._--Cut off the lower part of the stem;
skin them with a steel knife, commencing at the edge and finishing at
the top; cut in pieces, put them in cold water, to which you have added
a few drops of vinegar; leave them in it two hours, moving them
occasionally; then wash well in two or three waters, and drain.

When cleaned and prepared thus, they are ready to be used in sauces, or
to cook.

_Broiled._--If you have large mushrooms, clean and prepare as above,
except that you do not cut them; but when drained, put them upside down
on a greased gridiron, and on a moderate fire; place a little butter
around the stem upon the comb, and when done place them on a dish which
you have warmed in advance, and in the same position they had on the
gridiron; put again around the stem some butter kneaded with a little
chopped parsley, salt, and pepper, and serve. They must be served warm.

As an ornament, you may make, with common white note-paper, as many
little square boxes as you have mushrooms to broil; grease them with
butter, put the mushrooms in, set them on the gridiron, and on a
moderate fire, and serve them in the boxes when done.

_The same, stewed._--When cleaned and prepared as directed, and drained,
throw a quart of them in boiling water, to which you have added a few
drops of vinegar; boil five minutes, take them out, put them in cold
water to cool, drain and dry them in a towel. Put two ounces of butter
in a stewpan and set it on a good fire; when melted, sprinkle in it a
pinch of flour, add also a sprig of parsley, two small onions, a little
piece of carrot, a bay-leaf, salt, and pepper, cover with broth, and
boil till the onions are cooked; then take from the pan onions, parsley,
and bay-leaf, and put the mushrooms in instead; boil slowly about twenty
minutes, take from the fire, add to the sauce the yolks of two eggs well
beaten with a few drops of vinegar, and serve warm.

_Mushroom Catsup._--Clean and wash them well, stems and all; cut them in
two or four pieces; then place the pieces in a crockery vessel,
sprinkling salt on every layer of mushrooms, and leave thus twenty-four
hours. Take them out and press them well, so as to take all the juice
out, which you bottle at once, and cork. Put the mushrooms back in the
vessel, and twenty-four hours after press them again; and again put the
juice in bottles, and the mushrooms in the vessel, and repeat this
process again after another twenty-four hours. Then mix well together
the juice of the three pressings; add to it pepper, allspice, one clove
(or more, according to the quantity) broken in pieces; boil the whole,
skim off the scum as long as you see any on the surface, and strain.
Bottle when cool; put in each bottle two cloves and a pepper-corn, cork
air-tight, put in a cool and dry place, and it will keep for years.

_Dried._--Dried mushrooms are imported from Italy, they come cheaper
than the preserved ones in cans, and are as good for brown sauces. Soak
them in water over night; drain them, and they are ready for use.

_Onions a la Creme.--(With Cream.)_--Only small white onions are
prepared _a la creme_. Have water and a little salt on the fire, and
drop two dozen small white onions into it at the first boil. When
cooked, drain, and wipe them dry carefully, in order not to bruise
them. Set a saucepan on the fire with about two ounces of butter in it,
and when melted put the onions in, stirring gently for two or three
minutes, then turn about a gill of cream in, little by little, stirring
the while, and as soon as the whole is in take from the fire, salt to
taste, and serve hot.

_Glazed._--Peel a dozen of middling-sized onions and put them in a
saucepan with four ounces of butter, and set them on a slow fire; stir
occasionally till they are about three-quarters done, when add about two
ounces of powdered sugar, stir now and then and finish the cooking. When
done and well browned all around, add one or two tablespoonfuls of good
meat-gravy, keep a few minutes on a rather brisk fire in order to reduce
the sauce, but keep stirring and use. Onions prepared that way are
excellent, and generally used to decorate meat.

_Stewed._--Clean a quart of small onions, throw them in boiling water,
add two sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, a clove, a bay-leaf, a little
piece of nutmeg, a clove of garlic, salt, and pepper; boil twenty
minutes, drain the onions only, and throw away the seasonings. Put two
ounces of butter in a stewpan on a good fire, and when melted sprinkle
in it a teaspoonful of flour; then add the onions, cover with half broth
and half white wine, boil gently till well cooked and the sauce reduced,
serve warm. It is a very wholesome dish.

_Parsnips.--Sautees._--Scrape, wash, drain, and put about two quarts of
parsnips in a saucepan with cold water and a little salt, set on the
fire and boil till done, then drain. Cut the parsnips in slices, put two
ounces of butter in a frying-pan, and when melted put the sliced turnips
in, toss gently till they are of a fine golden color, then add salt and
pepper to taste, turn over a dish, sprinkle chopped parsley all over,
and serve warm.

_Stewed._--Scrape, clean, wash, boil, and drain as above directed, about
two quarts of parsnips. Put them immediately into a stewpan with salt,
pepper, and broth enough to about half cover them, boil gently for
fifteen minutes, and serve the whole as it is. They may also be prepared
in _poulette_, the same as turnips.

_Peas with Bacon._--Put in a stewpan on the fire four ounces of bacon
cut in dice (for one quart of peas), and toss and fry it for about five
minutes, then add the peas after having blanched them from five to ten
minutes, according to how tender they are; stir for two minutes and add
half a pint of broth or water, also a bunch of seasonings composed of
two or three sprigs of parsley, half a one of thyme, and a piece of
bay-leaf; stir again and mix, and then add also two or three small
onions, salt, and pepper; boil half an hour, remove the seasonings, and
serve peas and salt pork. A small sausage may be added for those who
like the taste of it.

_Plain boiled._--Put a saucepan on the fire with water and salt in it,
and at the first boil drop two quarts of peas in it; boil gently till
done, and then drain. As soon as they are in the colander, just toss
them a little, turn them over a dish, and put four ounces of butter on
the top, salt, and pepper, then place the dish in the oven with the door
open, that is, just to keep them warm and allow the butter to melt, stir
for one or two minutes, and serve warm.

_With Lettuce._--Blanch a quart of peas for about five minutes, and
drain them. Blanch a head of lettuce for one minute. Put peas and
lettuce in a saucepan with one ounce of butter, stir gently on the fire
for about one minute, and then add a little broth or water, two or three
sprigs of parsley, salt, and pepper; boil slowly till done, and serve
warm. The parsley may be served, or removed just before serving,
according to taste. The lettuce is always served with the peas.

_Au jus._--Boil the peas as directed for _plain boiled_, then put them
back on the fire with a little butter, stir for one minute, add about
three tablespoonfuls of gravy to a quart of peas, salt and pepper, give
one boil, and serve.

_With Ham._--Blanch two quarts of peas and drain them. Put them in a
saucepan with half a pound of ham, cut in dice, half cover them with
water, and boil gently till done. If the water boils away, add a little
more; serve warm.

Canned peas are prepared in the same way as above.

_A l'Anglaise._--If the peas are fresh, blanch them; if they are
preserved, drain them only. Put the peas in a saucepan with about one
ounce of butter for a pint, set on the fire, stir gently till thoroughly
warm, add chopped parsley and a yolk of egg, and serve.

_Au Sucre (with Sugar)._--Set the peas on the fire, the same as above,
add about one ounce of sugar, stir also till warm; take from the fire,
stir a yolk of egg in, and serve.

_Dry Peas and Split Peas._--Dry and split peas are prepared and served
in the same and every way like dry _beans_, with the exception that they
require to be soaked only for a few hours before cooking them.

_Potatoes.--To select._--As a general rule, the smaller the eye the
better the potatoes. By cutting off a piece from the larger end you
ascertain if they are sound; they must be white, reddish, bluish, etc.,
according to the species. If spotted, they are not sound, and therefore
very inferior. There are several kinds, and all of them are good when
sound or coming from a proper soil. Use the kind you prefer, or those
that are better fit for the way they are intended to be served. To mash
or to make a _puree_, etc., every kind is good. To serve whole or in
dice, or in pieces like carpels of oranges, those called _Mercers_ and
the like, are preferable, because they do not bruise so easily.

_To boil._--Being naturally watery, potatoes should never be cooked by
boiling except when wanted very white, as for _croquettes_. When boiled
whole, put them of an even size as much as possible, in order to cook
them evenly. They are better, more mealy, when steamed or baked, but
those who have no steamer must, of course, boil them. Cover them with
cold water, set on the fire and boil till done, then pour off all the
water, put the pan back on a slow fire for five minutes and well
covered; then use the potatoes.

_To steam._--Place them above a kettle of boiling water, in a kind of
drainer made for that purpose, and adapted to the kettle. The drainer
must be covered tight. They cook as fast as by boiling, the degree of
heat being the same. When steamed the skin is very easily removed.

_To prepare._--If they are to be boiled, or steamed, or baked, it is
only necessary to wash them. If wanted peeled, as for frying, etc., then
commence by cutting off the germs or eyes; if young and tender, take the
skin off with a scrubbing-brush and drop immediately in cold water to
keep them white; if old, scrape the skin off with a knife, for the part
immediately under the skin contains more nutriment than the middle, and
drop in cold water also. If wanted cut, either in dice, or like carpels
of oranges, or any other way, cut them above a bowl of cold water, so
that they drop into it, for if kept exposed to the air they turn reddish
and lose their nutritive qualities.

_A l'Allemande._--Steam, peel, and slice the potatoes. Cut some bread in
thin slices, and fry bread and potatoes with a little butter and turn
the whole in a bowl, dust well with sugar, pour a little milk all over
and bake for about fifteen minutes; serve warm.

_A l'Anglaise._--Steam or boil about a quart of potatoes and then peel
and slice them. Put two ounces of butter in a frying-pan on the fire,
and put the potatoes in when melted, toss them for about ten minutes,
add salt, pepper, a little grated nutmeg, and serve hot.

_A la barigoule._--Peel some potatoes and cook them whole in broth; when
done take them off carefully, so as not to break or bruise them, and
drain. Have some oil in a frying-pan and on a quick fire, and when hot
lay the potatoes in; move gently to fry them all around, and then dish
them, sprinkling salt, pepper, and vinegar, all over; serve warm.

_Bechamel._--Steam or boil and peel some potatoes, then slice them and
place on a dish; have a _Bechamel_ sauce ready, turn it over the
potatoes, and serve warm.

_Broiled._--Steam, peel and slice the potatoes. Lay the slices on a
gridiron, and place it over a rather slow fire; have melted butter, and
spread some over the slices of potatoes with a brush; as soon as the
under part is broiled, turn each slice over and spread butter over the
other side. When done, dish, salt, and serve them hot. A little butter
may be added when dished, according to taste.

_A la Parisienne._--Chop an onion fine and partly fry it with butter,
then put in it some potatoes cut in dice, add a little water or broth,
salt, and pepper; boil gently till done, take from the fire, add chopped
parsley, and serve.

_Fried._--To be fried, the potatoes are cut either with a vegetable
spoon, in fillets, in slices, with a scalloped knife, or with an
ordinary one, or cut in pieces like carpels of oranges, or even in dice.
When cut, drain and wipe them dry. This must be done quickly, so as not
to allow the potatoes to turn reddish. Have a coarse towel ready, then
turn the potatoes into a colander, and immediately turn them in the
towel, shake them a little, and quickly drop them in hot fat. (_See_
Frying.) When done, turn them into a colander, sprinkle salt on them,
and serve hot. Bear in mind that fried potatoes must be eaten as hot as
possible. Fry only one size at a time, as it takes three times as long
to fry them when cut in pieces as when sliced or cut in fillets.

_To fry them light, or swelled_.--When fried, turn into the colander,
and have the fat over a brisk fire; leave the potatoes in the colander
only about half a minute, then put them back in the very hot fat, stir
for about one minute and put them again in the colander, salt them, and
serve hot. If the fat is very hot, when dropped into it for the second
time they will certainly swell; there is no other way known to do it. It
is as easily done as it is simple. Potatoes cut in fillets and fried are
sometimes called _a la Parisienne_; when cut in slices or with a
vegetable spoon, they are called _a la francaise_.

Potatoes cut with a vegetable spoon and fried, make a good as well as a
sightly decoration for a dish of meat or of fish. They may be fried in
oil also, but it is more expensive than in fat. They may be fried in
butter also, but it is still more expensive than oil, and is not better
than fat; no matter what kind of fat is used, be it lard, beef suet, or
skimmings of sauces and gravy, it cannot be tasted.

_Hollandaise._--Steam or boil the potatoes, and then peel and mash
them. Season them with a teaspoonful of chopped parsley, salt, and
pepper, add also two tablespoonfuls of gravy to a quart of potatoes,
then make small balls about the size of a walnut, round or of an
olive-shape, dip them in beaten egg, roll in bread-crumbs, and fry in
hot fat. Serve hot.

_Another._--Proceed as for the above one in every particular, except
that you use milk or cream instead of broth, and sugar instead of salt
and pepper.

_Lyonnaise._--Potatoes _Lyonnaise_ are prepared according to taste, that
is, as much onion as liked is used, either in slices or chopped. If you
have not any cold potatoes, steam or boil some, let them cool, and peel
and slice them. For about a quart of potatoes, put two ounces of butter
in a frying-pan on the fire, and when melted put as much onion as you
please, either sliced or chopped, into the pan, and fry it till about
half done, when add the potatoes and again two ounces of butter; salt,
pepper, and stir and toss gently till the potatoes are all fried of a
fine, light-brown color. It may require more butter, as no vegetable
absorbs more than potatoes. It makes an excellent dish for those who do
not object to the taste of the onion (the onion can be tasted, not being
boiled or kept long enough on the fire to evaporate). Serve warm. Oil
may be used instead of butter.

_Maitre d'Hotel._--Steam or boil about a quart of potatoes, and then
peel and cut them in slices. Put one ounce and a half of butter in a
saucepan on the fire, and when melted add a small tablespoonful of
flour; stir, and when turning yellow add also about a quart of milk,
salt to taste, give one boil and take from the fire. Then add the
potatoes, put back on a slow fire, stir for ten minutes, mix in the
whole a teaspoonful of parsley chopped fine, also a yolk or two of eggs,
and serve warm.

_Another Maitre d'Hotel._--Take two quarts of potatoes, prepare and cook
them by steam, peel carefully, and cut them in thick slices; place them
on a dish and keep warm. Put four ounces of butter in a stewpan and set
it on a slow fire; add, when melted, a teaspoonful of chopped parsley,
the juice of half a lemon, salt, pepper, and a pinch of allspice, stir
ten minutes; afterward, put for five minutes on a quick fire, keep
stirring, then pour on the potatoes, and serve.

_Mashed._--Peel and quarter about three pints of potatoes as directed;
put them in a saucepan with more water than is necessary to cover them,
and a little salt; set on the fire and boil gently till done, drain, put
them back in the saucepan, mash them well and mix them with two ounces
of butter, two yolks of eggs, salt, pepper, and milk enough to make them
of a proper thickness. Set on the fire for two or three minutes,
stirring the while, and serve warm. When on the dish, smooth them with
the back of a knife or scallop them, according to fancy.

_Mashed and baked._--Put two ounces of butter in a stewpan and set it on
the fire; when hot, add a teaspoonful of parsley chopped fine, and a
little salt; five minutes after, put in it a quart of potatoes,
prepared, cooked, peeled, and mashed, as directed; then pour on the
whole, little by little, stirring continually with a wooden spoon, a
pint of good milk; and when the whole is well mixed, and becoming rather
thick, take from the fire, place on the dish, then set in a brisk oven
for five minutes, and serve.

_Polanaise._--Wash well about two quarts of potatoes, put them in a
saucepan and cover with cold water, season with salt, half a dozen whole
peppers, a bay-leaf, a sprig of thyme, and two or three onions in
slices; boil gently till done, and drain. Peel the potatoes, cut them
in two, dish and turn a _caper_ sauce over them. Serve warm.

_Provencale._--Peel and quarter about three pints of potatoes as
directed. Put in a saucepan about a gill of oil with the potatoes, salt,
pepper, a pinch of nutmeg, six sprigs of parsley, two cloves of garlic,
and half the rind of a lemon; the three latter spices well chopped; set
on a good fire, stir now and then till cooked, dish the whole, sprinkle
the juice of one or two lemons on, and serve warm.

_Another way._--Put in a stewpan three tablespoonfuls of sweet-oil, a
teaspoonful of chopped parsley, two cloves of garlic chopped very fine,
a pinch of grated nutmeg, the juice of half a lemon, salt, and pepper;
set on a good fire, and when hot put in it a quart of potatoes prepared
and cooked by steam, and cut in thick slices; subdue the fire, simmer
about ten minutes, and serve.

_Sautees._--Take a quart of young and tender potatoes, peel them with a
brush, and cut in slices. Put two ounces of butter in a frying-pan on a
quick fire; when hot, put the potatoes in, and fry them till of a golden
color; place them on a dish without any butter, sprinkle chopped parsley
and salt on, and serve. They may also be served without parsley,
according to taste.

_Soufflees._--Steam a quart of potatoes, then peel and mash them in a
saucepan and mix an ounce of butter with them; set on the fire, pour
into it, little by little, stirring the while, about half a pint of
milk, stir a little longer after the milk is in and until they are
turning rather thick; dish the potatoes, smooth or scallop them with the
back of a knife, and put them in a quick oven till of a proper color,
and serve.

_Another way._--Steam three pints of potatoes and peel and mash them in
a saucepan, then mix with them four ounces of butter, salt to taste,
half a pint of milk, and eight yolks of eggs; set on the fire for two
minutes, stirring the while, and take off. Beat six whites of eggs to a
stiff froth, and mix them gently with the rest. Place the mixture on a
dish, smooth with the back of a knife or scallop them, according to
fancy, and put in a quick oven. As soon as the top gets a little dry,
which will be in two or three minutes after being in the oven, take them
off and quickly spread some melted butter all over, by means of a brush,
and put back in the oven for two or three minutes longer, when take off
again, spread butter over the same as the first time, etc. Repeat the
same process two or three times, and serve warm.

_Stuffed._--Steam two or three potatoes and peel and mash them in a
bowl, then chop fine a small green onion or two shallots with two ounces
of fat salt pork and six or eight sprigs of parsley; mix the whole with
the potatoes; add also and mix with the rest about two ounces of butter,
and salt and pepper to taste. If the potatoes are not warm enough to
melt the butter while mixing, it should be melted first. Clean and wash
well six potatoes of an even size and split them in two lengthwise; then
with a small iron spoon remove the middle part of each half, so as to
leave only a thickness of about one-eighth of an inch. You have then a
kind of shell, which you fill with the prepared mixture above, filling
more than full, so that the top is convex, and which you smooth with the
back of a knife. When the twelve halves are thus prepared, butter the
bottom of a bakepan, lay the potatoes in with the mixture upward, and
put in a warm oven. Take from the oven when about half done, and spread
some melted butter all over by means of a brush; put back in the oven,
finish the baking, and serve warm.

_In Cakes._--Prepare and cook by steam a quart and a half of potatoes,
peel and mash them; mix with them the yolks of five eggs, half a
lemon-rind grated, and four ounces of fine white sugar. Put four ounces
of butter in a stewpan and set it on the fire; when melted, put the
mixture in, stirring with a wooden spoon continually; as soon as it is
in the stewpan, add the whites of the five eggs, well beaten; leave on
the fire only the time necessary to mix the whole well together, and
take off; when nearly cold, add, if handy, and while stirring, a few
drops of orange-flower water; it gives a very good flavor; then put the
whole in a tin mould greased a little with butter; place in a quick oven
for about thirty-five minutes, and serve.

_In Croquettes._--Peel, quarter, and boil about a quart of potatoes as
directed. Mash them in a saucepan and mix them with four yolks of eggs,
two ounces of butter, salt, and about half a gill of milk; set on the
fire, stir for about two minutes, take off, spread on a dish and leave
thus for two or three hours, and even over night when for breakfast.
When left over night, they may be rather too dry to work them; then mix
with a few drops of milk. No matter how long they have been left on the
dish, it is necessary to mix them, that is, to mix the top, which is the
driest part, with the rest. Dust the paste-board slightly with
bread-crumbs, put the potatoes on it, in parts of about a tablespoonful
each; then, with the hands and a knife, shape them according to fancy,
either round, flat, or oval, etc. When shaped round they look like a
piece of sausage about two inches and a half long. If wished flat, when
shaped round, just flatten them a little with the blade of a knife. Then
dip each part in beaten egg, roll in bread-crumbs, and fry in hot fat.
(_See_ Frying.) Take them off the fat when done, turn them into a
colander, and immediately dish, and serve them as warm as possible.
Potato _croquettes_ are sometimes called potato-balls. When the
_croquettes_ are shaped flat, they are also called "_a la duchesse_."

_Another Duchesse._--When the potatoes are ready to be spread on the
dish to cool, put them in the pastry-bag and squeeze them out of it like
lady's fingers, bake, and serve warm. It makes a sightly dish.

_In Matelote._--Prepare and cook a quart and a half of potatoes, and
peel and cut them in thick slices. Put in a stewpan a piece of butter
the size of an egg, and set it on the fire; when melted, sprinkle in it
a teaspoonful of flour, also the same of chopped parsley, salt, and
pepper, then the potatoes, wet with half a pint of claret wine, same of
broth; boil gently till the sauce is reduced, and serve.

_With Butter, or English Fashion._--Put water on the fire with
considerable salt in it; at the first boil, drop a quart of washed
potatoes in and boil till done, when take off, peel, and put them whole
in a saucepan, with butter, salt, pepper, and a little nutmeg; set on a
rather slow fire, stirring gently now and then till they have absorbed
all the butter. Serve warm. They absorb a great deal of butter.

_With Bacon or Salt Pork._--Peel and quarter about a quart of potatoes.
Set a saucepan on the fire with about four ounces of fat salt pork cut
in dice in it. When fried put the potatoes in. Season with a bunch of
seasonings composed of two sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, and a
bay-leaf; salt and pepper to taste, and about half a pint of broth or
water. Boil gently till cooked, remove the bunch of seasonings; skim off
the fat if any, and serve warm. It is served at breakfast, as well as
_entremets_ for dinner.

_With Cream or Milk._--Peel and mash a quart of potatoes, when prepared
and cooked. Put two ounces of butter in a stewpan and set it on a good
fire; when melted, sprinkle in it a teaspoonful of flour, same of
chopped parsley, a pinch of grated nutmeg, and salt; stir with a wooden
spoon five minutes; then add the potatoes, and half a pint of milk or
cream; keep stirring ten minutes longer, take from the fire, sprinkle in
them half a tablespoonful of sugar, and serve as warm as possible.

_With White Sauce._--Clean, wash, and throw a quart of potatoes in
boiling water, with a sprig of thyme, two onions, a bay-leaf, two sprigs
of sweet basil, two cloves, salt, and pepper; when cooked, take the
potatoes out carefully, peel and cut them in two, place them on a warm
dish, pour on them a white sauce, and serve warm.

_Sweet Potatoes._--They are prepared in the same and every way like the
others above.

_Pumpkins and Squashes._--Peel, take out the seed, cut in pieces, and
throw them in boiling water with a little salt; drain when cooked and
mash through a colander, put butter in a stewpan on the fire, when
melted, add chopped parsley, salt, pepper, and the pumpkin or squash,
and simmer ten minutes; after which pour in it half a pint of milk,
little by little, stirring the while; leave ten minutes longer on the
fire, and take off; mix well in it two or three yolks of eggs, and serve
warm. The quantity of milk, butter, eggs, etc., to be according to the
quantity of squash.

_Purslain._--Clean, wash well, and drop it in boiling water with a
little salt, boil till cooked, take off and drain. Put butter in a
stewpan on the fire, and when melted lay the purslain in, stir a little
and sprinkle on it, little by little, a pinch of flour; season with
salt, pepper, and chopped parsley, stir and simmer about ten minutes,
take from the fire, mix in it one or two beaten eggs, and serve.
Purslain is much more used in Europe than here; there it is cultivated
as other vegetables, but it does not grow as well as here.

_Rhubarb._--Scrape and cut it in pieces about one inch long, and then
blanch it for two minutes. Put it in a saucepan with two or three
tablespoonfuls of cold water and set it on a rather sharp fire, toss or
stir now and then till done, when sweeten to taste, dish, let cool, and
serve. Rhubarb is very wholesome, and ought to be partaken of at least
every other day. When prepared as above, it may be used to make pies.

[Illustration]

_Radishes._--The cuts below are turnip-rooted red radishes, cut with a
small knife, put in cold water for about an hour, and served with
butter, as a _hors-d'oeuvre_. Remove the outer leaves, leaving only four
or five of the small centre ones, cut off the root close to the radish,
and wash clean in cold water. Take the radish with the left hand holding
it by the centre leaves, cut the skin from the top downward to near the
leaves, in several parts, but without detaching it, and as seen in the
cuts above; do the same carefully with the body of the radish, and it
will look more like a rose than like a radish. After having prepared two
or three, it will be comparatively easy. The centre leaves must be
eaten, as well as the body of the radish; they contain a substance that
helps the digestion of the radish itself.

_Salsify, or Oyster-Plant._--Scrape them, and throw one by one as they
are scraped into cold water, with a few drops of vinegar; when they are
all scraped, move them a little, take out of the water, and throw them
in boiling water with a little salt, boil till tender, and drain; place
them warm on a warm dish, and serve with brown butter, a _maitre
d'hotel_, or white sauce.

_Fried._--When boiled as above, drain them. Then dip each in batter for
frying vegetables, drop them in hot fat, and take them off with a
skimmer when done, turn into a colander, salt them, and serve hot.

_In Bechamel._--While the salsify is boiling as directed above, make a
_Bechamel_ sauce; drain the salsify when done, and turn it into the
_Bechamel_ sauce as soon as the latter is finished; keep on the fire for
about two minutes, stirring the while, and serve warm. They are prepared
and served in the same way with the following sauces: _cream_,
_poulette_, and _white_.

_Skirret._--Prepare, cook, and serve in every way like parsnips.

_Sorrel._--Sorrel is found in a wild state nearly everywhere; that is,
where green plants vegetate. It is an excellent vegetable, good to eat
all the year round, but especially in the spring and summer. It is very
healthful, containing the pure oxalic acid as it is formed by Nature.
Sorrel is the greatest neutralizer of acrid substances. A few leaves
chewed, take away from the teeth that disagreeable feeling left after
having eaten a tart apple or other tart, unripe fruit. Cultivated in a
rich soil, the leaves grow nearly as large as those of the rhubarb. It
is cut to the ground several times during the spring and summer.

_To boil._--Take a peck of sorrel, separate the stalk from the eatable
part, by taking hold of it with one hand and tearing off the rest with
the other, so that only the stalk and fibres attached to it will remain
after the tearing, and which you throw away. Wash it well, drain and set
it on the fire in a saucepan with two tablespoonfuls of water; stir
occasionally, and when nearly done, take off, mash through a colander,
and it is ready for use.

_Au jus._--Put a piece of butter the size of an egg in a saucepan, set
it on the fire, and when melted, put the sorrel in after being boiled
and mashed as above, stir half a minute, add a tablespoonful of flour;
stir another half minute, add also half a gill of gravy, same of broth,
salt, stir two minutes, and serve. Hard-boiled eggs, split in four
pieces, lengthwise, may be placed around the dish, if the sorrel is
served as an _entremets_.

_To preserve for Winter Use._--When boiled and mashed as above, put it
in stone or glass jars; when cold, turn melted butter or lard over it;
cover as tightly as possible with paper, and when perfectly cold, put
away in a dark, dry, and rather cool place, and it will keep very well
during the whole winter. The best time to preserve it is at the
beginning of November, just before the cold weather sets in.

_Puree of._--When prepared as for _au jus_, but without gravy, it is a
_puree_.

_Spinach--to boil._--When cleaned and washed, throw it in boiling water
at the first boiling, with a pinch of salt, and boil till done. It will
take from one to ten minutes to boil, according to how tender it is.
Turn into a colander; press on it to force the water out, put on the
paste-board and chop it fine.

_Au jus._--When chopped, set the spinach on the fire in a saucepan with
a little broth, two or three tablespoonfuls for a small measure; stir,
add as much gravy, an ounce of butter, a teaspoonful of flour, salt,
stir two minutes, and serve.

_Au jus in Winter._--When prepared as above, put it away in a bowl in a
cool place, for one day; then set it back on the fire in a pan, add a
little butter and a little broth, stir and just warm it, when put away
again; repeat this for four or five days in succession, and you
certainly will have an excellent dish. Some hard-boiled eggs cut in four
pieces, lengthwise, may be placed around the spinach when dished, also
some _croutons_. Spinach is generally served on a flat dish, and
scalloped all around with a knife.

_With Sugar._--Proceed as for spinach _au jus_ in every particular,
except that you put very little salt, and one or two teaspoonfuls of
sugar, according to taste. Lady-fingers or pieces of sponge-cake may be
placed all around the dish.

_A la Creme._--Boil and chop the spinach as directed. Set it on the fire
in a saucepan, stir till perfectly dry, but not burnt; add two ounces of
butter, and stir again for five or six minutes; then add about two
tablespoonfuls of cream to a small measure of spinach; stir again five
minutes, take from the fire; add again one ounce of butter, stir two
minutes, and serve with hard-boiled eggs or _croutons_, or both. Milk
may be used instead of cream when the latter cannot be had, but it is
inferior in taste.

_With Anchovy._--Proceed as for the above, using a tablespoonful of
essence of anchovy instead of cream.

_Spinach au Beurre, or a l'anglaise._--Boil and chop the spinach as
directed. Put it in a saucepan with butter; set on the fire, stir till
the butter is melted and mixed with the spinach, salt to taste, and
serve.

_Sprouts._--Boil, prepare, and serve sprouts the same as spinach.

_Tomatoes_ are, like sorrel and rhubarb, very healthful.

_To blanch._--After they are washed, throw boiling water over them, and
then take off and remove the skin.

_Stewed, to serve with Meat or Fish._--When blanched as above, put the
tomatoes in a stewpan with butter, salt, and pepper, set on the fire and
simmer for about forty-five minutes; serve warm all around the fish or
piece of meat. Tomatoes may be eaten raw, with or without salt; in no
matter what way they are partaken of, they are not yet known to have
indisposed anybody. Although great quantities are consumed in this and
other countries, still many more ought to be used; they are so easily
preserved, that every family ought to have a large provision of them for
the winter and spring consumption.

_Stuffed._--Soak in cold water one-fourth of a ten-cent loaf of bread,
etc.; when perfectly soaked, squeeze it with the hands. Take six
tomatoes, as much of an even size as possible, cut the top off; that is,
the side opposite the stem, and with a small spoon take out the inside
and put it in a bowl, and then turn into a colander to let the liquid
part run off. Put about an ounce of butter in a saucepan, and when
melted add a small onion chopped; stir, and when nearly fried add also
the part of the tomatoes in the colander also chopped; stir half a
minute; put in the soaked bread, stir and mix; then salt, pepper, and
grated nutmeg; give one boil more, and take from the fire. Fill the
tomatoes with this mixture, dust with bread-crumbs, put a piece of
butter the size of a hazel-nut on each, and bake. Just before serving,
wet with a little tomato-sauce, broth, or gravy.

_Turnips--to boil._--Clean, scrape, and wash well, then put them in a
saucepan, either whole or in slices, or cut with a fruit-corer or with a
vegetable spoon, add cold water enough to boil them in, a little salt,
set on the fire and boil gently till tender; then take off, drain, drop
in cold water, drain again, and use.

_In Bechamel._--While the turnips are boiling as described above, make a
_Bechamel_ sauce and turn the turnips in as soon as made; boil gently
about two minutes, stirring the while, and serve warm. Do exactly the
same with a cream or white sauce.

_Au jus._--Boil and drain them as directed above, then put them in a
saucepan with a little gravy, set on the fire, stir now and then for
about ten minutes, add a teaspoonful of _meuniere_, stir again for two
or three minutes, and serve warm.

_With Sugar._--Cut with a fruit-corer or with a vegetable spoon about a
pint of turnips, and boil them till under done, then drain. Put the
turnips in a saucepan with two or three tablespoonfuls of broth, set on
a good fire, toss occasionally for about ten minutes, then add two or
three tablespoonfuls of sugar, toss again now and then for ten minutes
longer, and serve. It may take a little longer or less time than
described above, according to the state of the turnips; if young and
very tender, keep on the fire five instead of ten minutes, and if old,
it may take fifteen minutes.

_Glazed._--Cut the turnips with a vegetable spoon, boil them for five
minutes, and drain them. Put half a gill of broth in a saucepan with
about one pint of turnips and set on a good fire; toss and stir now and
then till done, and till the broth is all boiled away. If it boils away
before the turnips are cooked, add more and finish the cooking. When
done, sprinkle about three ounces of sugar on them, stir for about one
minute, dish the turnips, dredge powdered sugar all over, put in the
oven two minutes, and serve.

_Water-cress._--This contains much sulphur, and is the greatest
anti-scorbutic known. Besides being eaten with salt or in salad, it may
also be stewed in the following way: Take only the top and the leaves
around the stalk; clean and wash it well; throw it in boiling water with
a little salt, and when cooked drain it well, so as to extract all the
water from it. Put a piece of butter the size of an egg in a stewpan;
when melted, put the cress in, sprinkle on it a tablespoonful of flour
(for three quarts); stir continually with a spoon, boil ten minutes,
then add salt, pepper, a little grated nutmeg, and half a pint of broth;
boil ten minutes longer, and serve either alone, or with hard-boiled
eggs on it; cut the eggs in two or four pieces.

_Salads._--Salads are seasoned with oil, vinegar, salt, and pepper, and
sometimes with mustard also. The best oil is that made of olives, but
much is sold for olive-oil which contains more lard than oil. It is
impossible to tell which is pure by the color. Pure olive-oil is of a
pale-yellow-greenish color. It is very easy to tell the pure oil by
tasting, but of course it is necessary to know the real taste of good
oil.

The best vinegar is wine-vinegar, with _tarragon_ in it (_vinaigre a
l'estragon_), but it is expensive. Next to it is cider-vinegar. Beer
makes good vinegar, but inferior to that made with cider. Pyrolignic
vinegar is very unhealthy. No one can be too careful in selecting
vinegar. The superiority of the French mustard comes from the compounds
used, and not from the way it is made, as thought by many. In the French
mustard, besides _vinaigre a l'estragon_, there is white wine, and more
sweet-oil than in any other kind. A good deal of mustard is made here,
and often sold as French, after being carefully labelled.

Salad is made with every species of lettuce; chicory, cultivated and
wild; cabbages, red and white; cauliflowers, celery, dandelion,
corn-salad, purslain, water-cress, etc. If it were possible to clean the
salad by merely wiping the leaves with a towel, it would be better than
washing; but it must be washed if there is any earth or sand on it. The
salad should be made by an experienced person, who can judge at a glance
what quantity of salt, pepper, oil, and vinegar is necessary. The
quantities cannot be given, as that depends on the quantity of salad.
Chopped parsley and chives are served on a small plate at the same time
with the salad, as many persons like those spices.

_Celery._--When the celery is washed and cleaned, wipe it dry, cut the
white or eatable part (the top or green part is used for soup) in pieces
about one inch long, put them in the salad-dish with salt, vinegar, and
mustard, stir a little, leave thus about one hour, then add pepper and
oil, move again, and serve.

_Lettuce._--Lettuce, and especially Cos or Roman lettuce, must be
handled very gingerly, in order not to wilt the leaves while cleaning
and washing. When the head of the lettuce, especially of Roman lettuce,
is hard, it is not necessary to wash it at all, as when the outer leaves
are taken off, the rest is perfectly clean. Never use the knife, but
break the leaves; put them in the salad-dish; spread all over the dish,
according to taste and fancy, the blossoms and petals (not the leaves)
of any or all of the following plants: burnet, wild chiccory, rose (any
kind), pink, sage, lady's-slipper, marsh-mallow, nasturtium, periwinkle.
Thus decorated, the salad is put on the table at the setting of it, and
made when the time for eating it comes. Of these decorative flowers, the
handiest are the rose and pink, as at every season of the year they are
easily obtained. In spring and summer most of the others can also be had
easily.

The salad, thus decorated, is placed on the table at the same time with
the soup. It is made while the roast-piece is carved or eaten; the
petals of flowers or blossoms are not removed, and, of course, are eaten
with the lettuce. The salad is seasoned with salt, pepper, vinegar, and
oil. The proportions are two tablespoonfuls of oil to one of vinegar for
a salad for three, four, or five persons. It is generally moved round in
the dish, so as to impregnate every leaf with the seasoning. It is
served immediately after the roast-piece.

Cream may be used instead of oil.

_Turnip-rooted Celery (called also Soup Celery._)--Clean, wash well, and
scrape it carefully; cut it in thin slices, place it in the salad-dish,
sprinkle salt, pepper, vinegar, and mustard on it, mix well the whole
together, and leave thus from four to six hours. Then throw away the
vinegar, or most of it; add very little salt and vinegar, oil, and move
well. Serve as above, that is, immediately after the roast-piece of the
dinner.

A salad with cabbage, chiccory, corn-salad, or any kind of greens, after
being properly cleaned, washed, wiped dry, and cut in pieces if
necessary, is made and served exactly like a salad of lettuce described
above.

_Nasturtium._--This is said to be a native of Mexico; it makes a good
salad in summer-time. Make and serve like a salad of lettuce.

_Chervil and Sorrel._--In Italy, Spain, and the south of France, they
make salad with these two vegetables, half of each, prepared and served
like lettuce.

Some persons like a thick sauce with salad; it is made thus: Put a
hard-boiled yolk of egg in a bowl, mash it, and then mix with it salt
and a tablespoonful of vinegar; when these three are thoroughly mixed,
add pepper and oil (about two tablespoonfuls of oil), little by little,
stirring and mixing well the while; turn the mixture over the salad, and
move as directed above. The mixture may be prepared in the salad-dish,
and the salad put in afterward.

Mustard should never be used with lettuce; it is too strong to be eaten
with such tender vegetables.

_Of Salsify._--In the spring, when the top of the salsify has grown for
one or two weeks only, and immediately after the frost is out of the
ground, cut it off, split it in four, wash it well, drain it dry, and
prepare as a salad of lettuce. The root is prepared as described for
salsify, and is never made in salad.

_Of Cucumbers._--Peel and slice them, then put them in a vessel, salt
every layer, and leave thus in a cool place about one hour, drain them
dry and then dress them with oil, vinegar, salt, and pepper; slices of
onion may be added, if liked.

_Of Beans._--Boil the beans in water with a little salt, drain them dry,
and then dress them with parsley chopped fine, salt, pepper, oil, and
vinegar.

_Of Beets._--Boil the beets in water only till done, and when cool, peel
and slice them, and prepare them with pepper, salt, vinegar, and oil.
The beets may be baked.

_Of Eggs._--Slice hard-boiled eggs, and dress them with chopped parsley,
salt, pepper, vinegar, and oil.

_Of Lentils._--Proceed as for beans in every particular.

_Of Onions._--Bake the onions, then peel and slice them, and dress them
with mustard, salt, pepper, vinegar, and oil.

_Of Tomatoes._--Wash, wipe dry, and slice the tomatoes; slice also
onions and mix with them, the quantity to be according to taste; then
season with salt, pepper, oil, and vinegar.

_Of Walnuts._--The European walnut only can be used, and as soon as good
to eat; that is, before the outer shell dries and opens. Break the nuts
in two, take out the kernels with a pointed knife, and place them in a
salad-dish, with some juice of grapes not yet ripe; add salt and pepper,
leave thus two or three hours, moving now and then, and serve. The
edible part will be found very good eaten that way. To persons who have
never eaten any, it may appear a strange dish, but let them try it.

_Of Potatoes._--A potato-salad is the one that requires the most
seasonings, especially oil and vinegar. They are better served warm than
cold, although many prefer them in the latter state. When steamed,
peeled, and sliced, put them in the salad-dish, with salt, pepper,
vinegar, oil, and parsley, to taste. Mix the whole gently and well, and
serve. If served very warm, butter may be used instead of oil.

_Another._--Add to the above a few anchovies, or slices of pickled
cucumbers, or capers, or pickled beets.

_Another._--Add to the first some slices of truffles, previously soaked
in Madeira wine for ten hours, and also a little of the wine.

_Another._--Put a hard-boiled yolk of egg in the salad-dish, with two
tablespoonfuls of oil, and mix well so as to make a paste of them; then
add two anchovies, a piece of tunny the size of a nutmeg, and half a
dozen sprigs of chervil, the whole chopped fine; mix again with the
rest; add also a chopped pickled cucumber, mustard to taste, vinegar,
and then the slices of potatoes (warm or cold), slices of truffles
previously soaked in Madeira wine, a little of the wine also, salt, and
pepper; stir and mix again well, and serve.

_Apricots, Oranges, Peaches, Pears, Strawberries, Raspberries,
Blackberries, Currants, and like Berries, in Salad._--Dust the bottom of
a dish with white sugar, put a layer of slices of apricots, oranges,
peaches, or pears, or a layer of the others entire, and dust again;
repeat the same till the whole is in, then add over the whole a pinch of
grated nutmeg, with French brandy or rum to suit your taste, and serve
as a dessert.

_Cocoa-nut._--Peel it carefully and soak it in brandy for twenty-four
hours. A little sugar may be added; serve as a dessert.

_Salad Macedoine._--This salad ought to be called "compound salad," as
it is made of a little of every thing that can be served in salad, i. e.,
fish, meat, green and dry vegetables, &c. When the whole is mixed,
you add chopped parsley, sweet-oil, vinegar, salt, and pepper; you shake
it till your arms are sore, and you have a salad _Macedoine_. Every one
should try it; serve as an _entremets_.

_Salmon and Turbot._--Cut in slices, place them in a salad-dish, with
hard-boiled eggs cut in two, or with some lettuce, and serve as a
_hors-d'oeuvre_, with salt, pepper, oil, and vinegar.

_Of Pineapple._--Proceed as for that of apricots, etc., in every
particular.

_Of Anchovy._--Clean and bone the anchovies, and then place them in the
middle of a dish; chop fine some hard-boiled yolks of eggs and put a
string of it around the anchovies; do the same with the whites, and then
put a string of chopped parsley around the whites; season with oil and
very little vinegar. Serve as a _hors-d'oeuvre_.

_Pickles and Preserves._--To pickle the fruit, it must be pickled before
commencing to ripen, and be sound; the same for vegetables. When the
fruit or vegetable is clean, and cut in pieces, if necessary, such as
cabbage, have water on the fire, and drop it in at the first boil. If
the fruit or vegetable is desired white, add to the water lemon or
unripe grape juice. It is necessary to be very careful in blanching,
for, if too much blanched or cooked, it will be soft and tasteless; if
not enough, it will ferment. As a general rule, it is cooked as soon as
it floats, but it can be ascertained by running a skewer or a small
knife through it. By putting some fresh spinach-leaves or fresh
grape-vine-leaves on the top of the fruit or vegetable, it will keep it
more green than without. When blanched, take from the fire and drain.
Drop it immediately in cold water, and drain again. When dry, put the
fruit or vegetable in jars, cover it with boiling vinegar; season with
peppers, pepper-corns, cloves, and tarragon, also some rock-salt. When
perfectly cold, seal the jars air-tight, and keep in a dark, cool, and
dry closet. Every kind of fruit or vegetables can be pickled in the same
way; the only difference is in the time of blanching or cooking, which
is according to the nature of the fruit: _apples_, _string-beans_,
_beets_, _cabbages_, _cauliflowers_, _cherries_, _cucumbers_, _lemons_,
_melons_, _mushrooms_, _onions_, _peaches_, _pears_, _plums_,
_pumpkins_, _quinces_, _radishes_, _walnuts_, etc., may also be
preserved in salt and water, and in the following way: When cooked as
above, put them in jars and cover them with very salt water. Seal when
cool, and then put the jars in a boiler full of cold water, with straw
or rags to prevent breaking them; set on the fire, boil from twenty to
thirty minutes, take from the fire, let cool; then take the jars from
the water and put away as the above.

_Peas_ and _mushrooms_ are almost always preserved in water and salt.

_Asparagus_ is also preserved, but it is so difficult to succeed, that
even manufacturers of preserves have given it up.

_Tomatoes._--Wash them and then bruise them in a boiler; set on the
fire, boil half an hour, and strain, to secure all the juice. Put the
juice on the fire, boil till reduced about one-half, let cool, put in
jars, seal them, put them in a boiler of cold water, with straw or rags
to prevent breakage; set the boiler on the fire, boil twenty minutes,
take off, let cool. When perfectly cold, take the jars off, place in a
cool, dark cellar, and we warrant that they keep for years. No salt or
seasonings of any kind are used to preserve them. When you wish to use
them, season to taste.

_Tomato Catsup._--To make catsup with the above sauce, you have only to
add to it, when in jars, peppers, pimento, cloves, etc.; but it is
really not necessary, being too strong for this climate.

_Another way._--Take good and well-ripened tomatoes, clean and wash them
well, put them in a stewpan and set it on a moderate fire for a while;
take from the fire, throw away the water coming from them, and then
strain them into a vessel. Put what there is in the vessel back on the
fire, and in the same stewpan, and let it reduce about one-half; take
from the fire, pour in a crockery pot, and leave thus twenty-four hours;
then put in bottles, cork well, and place them in a cold and dry place.

_Cucumbers_.--The small green ones are the best. Clean them well in cold
water with a brush, removing the prickles. Put cold water in a vessel
with rock-salt in it, and shake it to dissolve the salt; soak the
cucumbers in it for about three days. Take them out and immediately put
them in pots or jars with small onions, a few cloves of garlic,
pepper-corns, rock-salt, cloves, and a bunch of seasonings composed of
bay-leaves, tarragon, and burnet; cover them with boiling vinegar (turn
the vinegar on them as soon as it boils), cover the pots or jars
air-tight when perfectly cold. Look at the cucumbers every two or three
days for the first three weeks, and after that only once in a while.
According to the quality of the vinegar or of the cucumber itself, the
whole may turn white after a while; in that case throw away vinegar and
spices, put new spices in, the same spices as above, except the onions,
which you keep with the cucumbers; cover again with boiling vinegar, and
cover when cold as before. If they have not been kept too long in that
state before changing the vinegar, they will be just as good as if they
had not turned white.




  EGGS, MACARONI, AND RICE.


Eggs are fit to eat as soon as laid, and the sooner they are used the
better. You ascertain if they are fresh with an oonoscope, or by holding
them before a light and looking through. There are several ways to
preserve eggs, but to do which they must be fresh; as soon as perfectly
cold after being laid, they may be preserved. Dissolve gum in water to
the consistency of thin mucilage, and with a brush give a coat of it to
the eggs; lay them in a box of charcoal dust and keep them in a dry,
dark, and cool place. When wanted, they are soaked in cold water for a
few minutes, and washed. They are also preserved in hydrate of lime.
When boiled hard, let them cool and place them in a dry, cool, and dark
place; they will keep for weeks. If wanted warm after that, put them in
cold water, set on the fire, and take off when the water is warm.

_With Mushrooms._--Cut in strips or fillets four mushrooms, one onion,
one clove of garlic, and fry them with two ounces of butter, then add a
tablespoonful of flour, stir for about one minute, add also half a pint
of broth, same of white wine, boil gently till reduced about one-half,
when put in the pan eight or ten hard-boiled eggs cut in dice, or cut
the whites only in dice and put in the yolk whole, boil one minute and
serve. It makes an excellent dish for breakfast.

_With Cheese and Parsley._--Put about two ounces of butter in a saucepan
on the fire, and when melted fry in it a tablespoonful of parsley,
chopped fine; then add a pinch of nutmeg, salt, pepper, about four
ounces of pineapple or Gruyere cheese, grated, and a gill of white wine;
stir till the cheese is melted, when you add eight or ten eggs, one
after another, stirring the whole time and mixing them with the cheese;
serve when done. More cheese may be used, according to taste.

_In Fricassee._--Put about half a pound of stale bread with one pint of
milk in a saucepan on the fire and boil for two or three minutes, then
mash well so as to mix the two together, put back on the fire, stir
continually till it makes a rather thin paste, then take off, mix with
it six or eight eggs, grated cheese to taste, salt and pepper, put back
on the fire, stir, and serve when cooked. Lemon-juice may be sprinkled
on just before serving.

_A la Lyonnaise._--Chop fine two white onions and fry them with two
ounces of butter, then add salt, a pinch of nutmeg, half a pint of
broth; boil gently and stir now and then till it turns rather thick,
when you add also eight whites of eggs, chopped; give one boil, and
serve. Place the eight yolks, whole, all around, and between and
alternately a small cake _feuillete_, and serve warm.

_A la Bechamel._--Slice the eggs or cut them in four pieces lengthwise,
put them in _Bechamel_ sauce, set on a slow fire for two minutes, and
serve warm.

_Fines Herbes._--Mix well together in a saucepan, and cold, two ounces
of butter with a tablespoonful of flour; set on the fire, stir, and when
melted thoroughly, add a teaspoonful of parsley and one of chives,
chopped fine, salt, pepper, and about a gill of white wine; stir, and
boil gently for about five minutes, and turn over hard-boiled eggs in a
dish; serve warm. The eggs are served whole, shelled, but not cut.

_Piquante-Sauce._--Dish hard-boiled eggs as for _fines herbes_, and turn
over them a _piquante sauce_; serve warm. They may be served in the same
way with any other sauce.

_Stuffed, or a l'Aurore._--Cut six hard-boiled eggs in two lengthwise;
take the yolks off the whites; chop them fine with six or eight sprigs
of parsley, put both eggs and parsley in a bowl; add salt, pepper, a
little nutmeg grated, a piece of the soft part of bread soaked in milk
and squeezed, three ounces of butter, mix the whole well. Then with the
mixture fill the whites, that is, the place where the yolks were; fill a
little more than full, so that all the mixture will go into and upon the
twelve halves. Lay in a saucepan a _puree_ of spinach or of sorrel, or
of any other vegetable, according to taste; lay the halves of eggs on
it, the mixture upward; put for ten minutes in the oven, and serve warm.

_In Boxes._--Fold note-paper so as to make a kind of square box without
a cover; put half an ounce of butter in it with a pinch of chopped
parsley; lay it on a gridiron and on a slow fire, break an egg in it,
and when nearly done add salt and bread-crumbs, to taste; serve warm
when done.

_With Cheese._--Prepare as the above; add grated cheese at the same time
you add salt and bread-crumbs; finish the cooking, and serve warm.

_Au Gratin._--Chop fine six or eight sprigs of parsley, a shallot if
handy, or a small onion, half an ounce of the soft part of bread, an
anchovy, and then mix the whole well with two ounces of butter; mix
again with two yolks of eggs, place the mixture in a tin dish, place on
a slow fire, and when getting rather dry break half a dozen eggs over
it, dust with bread-crumbs, season with salt and pepper, and when nearly
done spread two yolks of eggs beaten, with a teaspoonful of water over
the whole, and serve warm.

_With Ham._--Prepare as scrambled eggs with the exception that you put
in the pan, at the same time you put in the eggs, four ounces of boiled
ham cut in dice. Serve the same.

_With Milk, Water, or Cream._--These three names are wrongly applied to
eggs in many cook-books; they are creams, and not eggs.

_Ham and Eggs._--There are several ways of preparing this good dish; the
ham may be raw or boiled; in slices or in dice; mixed with the eggs, or
merely served under. Fry the ham slightly, dish it and then turn fried
eggs over it; or fry both at the same time, the eggs being whole or
scrambled, according to taste.

_With Asparagus._--Cut in pieces, about a quarter of an inch long, a
gill of the tender part of asparagus, throw it in boiling water with a
little salt; boil as directed, and drain. Beat eight eggs just enough to
mix the yolks with the whites; put them in a stewpan, season with a
pinch of grated nutmeg, salt, and pepper; add also a tablespoonful of
warm water, set on a slow fire, stir till they are becoming thick; then
add four ounces of butter, stir five minutes longer; add the gill of
asparagus; simmer about five minutes longer, and serve.

_Boiled._--(_See_ Eggs in the Shell.)--Put the eggs in boiling water
with a little salt, as near as possible at the first boiling; leave from
five to ten minutes; take out and put them immediately in cold water;
then shell them without breaking them, and use.

_With Brown Butter._--Break gently in a plate or dish, and without
breaking the yolks, eight eggs; sprinkle salt and pepper on them. Put
two ounces of butter in a frying-pan, and on a good fire; when turning
brown subdue the fire. Put also, and at the same time, the same quantity
of butter in another frying-pan, and on a good fire, and when hot, place
the eggs in without breaking the yolks; then spread over the eggs the
brown butter you have in the other; take from the fire when you see the
whites becoming hard; put them on a dish, pour on them a tablespoonful
of vinegar which you have warmed in the pan after having used the brown
butter, and serve.

_Fried._--Put half a pound of lard in a frying-pan, and on a good fire;
when hot, break gently, one by one (being careful not to break the
yolk), the quantity of eggs you can put in the pan without allowing them
to adhere together; turn them upside down once with a spoon or skimmer;
take from the pan with a skimmer as soon as the white part becomes hard,
and serve with fried parsley around.

_Scrambled, or Mashed._--Beat six eggs just enough to mix the whites and
yolks together; put two ounces of butter in a stewpan, and set on the
fire; when melted, take from the fire, add salt, pepper, and a pinch of
grated nutmeg, then the eggs, also a tablespoonful of broth; put back on
a very slow fire, stir continually till cooked, and serve warm.

_Sur le Plat._--Butter the bottom of a crockery or tin dish with two
ounces of butter; break into the dish and over the butter, gently and
without breaking the yolks, six eggs; sprinkle salt, pepper, and grated
nutmeg all over, put the dish on a slow fire, or on warm cinders, and
when the white is hard, serve. They must be served in the dish in which
they are cooked.

_In the Shell._--Bear in mind that some eggs cook quicker than others.
Put eggs in boiling water for two minutes, if liked soft or underdone;
and three minutes, if liked more done. They are generally served
enveloped in a napkin.

_In Matelote._--Put a bottle of claret wine in a stewpan and set it on a
good fire; add to it two sprigs of parsley, one of thyme, a clove of
garlic, a middling-sized onion, a clove, a bay-leaf, salt, and pepper;
boil fifteen minutes; then take all the seasonings out and have your
wine boiling gently; break one egg in by letting it fall gently in order
to have it entire, and then take it out immediately with a skimmer, and
place it on a dish; do the same with eight eggs; keep them in a warm
(but not hot) place. After which put in the wine, without taking it from
the fire, four ounces of butter kneaded with a tablespoonful of flour;
boil till reduced to a proper thickness, pour it on the eggs, and serve.

_With Onions._--Cut in dice three middling-sized onions and put them in
a saucepan with four ounces of butter; set it on a moderate fire and
stir now and then till the onions are turning yellow, then sprinkle on
them a teaspoonful of flour, salt, and pepper; add a pint of warm water
and boil gently till rather thick, but not too much so. Put into the
saucepan half a dozen hard-boiled eggs cut in four pieces each,
lengthwise, boil gently two or three minutes longer, and serve warm.

_With Green Peas._--Proceed as for eggs with asparagus, except that you
boil a gill of peas instead of asparagus; prepare and serve in the same
way.

_With Cauliflowers._--Blanch the cauliflowers and proceed as for the
above. Eggs are prepared as above, with celery, lettuce, etc.

_A la Tripe._--Proceed exactly the same as for eggs with onions, except
that you use milk or broth instead of water.

_A la Neige, or Floating Island._--Beat four (or more) whites of eggs to
a stiff froth. Put in a tin saucepan one pint of milk and one ounce of
sugar, set on the fire, and as soon as it rises put lumps of the whites
into it with a skimmer, turn the lumps over after having been in about
half a minute, leave them in another half minute, take them off with a
skimmer also, place them on a sieve to allow the milk that may be around
the lumps to drop. Put in a tin saucepan four yolks of eggs, two ounces
of sugar, and mix well; add the milk that has been used to cook the
whites, after having strained it, and mix again. Set on the fire, stir,
give one boil, take off, add a few drops of essence to flavor; turn into
a dish; place the lumps of whites gently on the liquor and they will
float, and serve cold. If the liquor is desired thicker, use only half
of the milk.

_To poach Eggs._--Set cold water on the fire in a frying-pan, with salt
and vinegar in it, a tablespoonful of vinegar to a quart of water. As
soon as it boils, break a fresh egg in the water or in a small plate,
and slide it gently into the water. Then with a skimmer turn the white
gently and by degrees over the yolk, so as to envelop the latter in the
former, giving the eggs an elongated shape. They may be poached hard or
soft--hard when the yolk is cooked hard; soft when the yolk is still in
a soft state.

_Fondue of Eggs._--Beat well six eggs, and put them in a stewpan with
two ounces of _Gruyere_, well grated, and about one ounce of butter; set
on a brisk fire, and leave till it becomes rather thick, stirring all
the time with a wooden spoon; take from the fire, add pepper, and stir
a little; turn over on a warm dish, and serve. This is a very favorite
dish in Italy, and also in Switzerland, where it originated.

_To beat Whites of Eggs._--Have a convenient basin; break the eggs
gently; allow the whites to fall in the basin and retain the yolks in
the shell. This is very easily done by breaking the shell about the
middle, opening slowly so as to let the white fall, and at the same time
retain the yolk in one of the halves of the shell; if some white
remains, turn the yolk from one half into the other, and _vice versa_,
till the whole of it has fallen. Then add a very small pinch of salt to
prevent the curdling of the eggs; commence by beating slowly; beat
faster and faster, till they form a stiff froth. They are well beaten
when, placing a twenty-five and a ten-cent silver piece on the top, they
are firm enough to bear them. If the pieces sink, beat again. Always
beat eggs in a cool place, they will rise better and faster. (_See_
Egg-beater.)

_Basin._--Pay no attention to the old prejudice and belief that metal is
not good to beat eggs in. The best and easiest for family use, in which
one as well as a dozen whites of eggs can be easily whisked, is of
block-tin, and can be made by any tinsmith. It has the shape of an
ordinary goblet or tumbler if the foot is cut off, the bottom being
round. Size: six inches deep from the centre of the bottom to the top;
eight inches in diameter at the top, and only six inches in diameter
where the bottom commences (or five inches from the top); the basin
being broader at the top than at the bottom, and the bottom being one
inch deeper in the centre than on the sides.

_Omelets--how to beat the Eggs._--Break in a bowl the quantity of eggs
you want, or as many as there are persons at the table; beat them well
with salt and pepper, by means of a fork. A little grated nutmeg may be
added, if liked. The adding of milk to the eggs makes the omelet soft.

_To make it._--Always have a brisk fire to make an omelet; the quicker
it is made the better, and the less butter it requires. If possible,
have a frying-pan to make omelets only in; keep it in a clean place and
never wash it if you can help it; by warming it a little before making
the omelets and wiping it with a coarse towel, you can keep it as clean
as can be without washing. To wash it causes the omelet to adhere to it
while cooking, and injures its appearance. Commence by beating the eggs,
then put the butter in the frying-pan, about two ounces for eight eggs;
set on the fire and toss gently to melt the butter as evenly and as
quickly as possible, else some of it will get black before the whole is
melted. As soon as melted, turn the beaten eggs in, and stir and move
continually with a fork or knife, so as to cook the whole as nearly as
possible at the same time. If some part of the omelet sticks to the pan,
add a little butter, and raise that part with a knife so as to allow the
butter to run under it, and prevent it from sticking again. It must be
done quickly, and without taking the pan from the fire. When cooked
according to taste, soft or hard, fold, dish, and serve warm.

It is _folded_ in this way: run the knife or fork under one part of the
omelet, on the side nearest to the handle of the pan, and turn that part
over the other part of the omelet, so as to double it or nearly so; then
have an oval dish in your left hand, take hold of the frying-pan with
the right hand, the thumb upward instead of the fingers, as is generally
the case in taking hold of a pan, incline the dish by raising the left
side, place the edge of the pan (the one opposite to the handle) on the
edge of the dish, turn it upside down--and you have the omelet on the
dish, doubled up and sightly. Cooks do not succeed in turning out a
decent omelet generally, because they cook it too much, turn it upside
down in the pan, or because they do not know how to handle the pan.

In holding the pan as it is generally and naturally held, that is, with
the palm of the hand resting on the upper side of the handle, it is
impossible for anybody, cook or other, to dish the omelet properly
without extraordinary efforts; while by resting the thumb on the upper
part of the handle, the fingers under it, the little finger being the
nearest to the pan, it is only necessary to move the right hand from
right to left, describing a circle and twisting the wrist, so that, when
the pan is turned upside down, the fingers are up instead of downward,
as they were when taking hold of the pan.

An omelet is called soft if, when you commence to fold, only about
two-thirds of the eggs are solidified; and hard, when nearly the whole
of the eggs are solidified. With a good fire it takes only about four
minutes to make an omelet.

By following our directions carefully, it will be very easy to make an
omelet, and make it well and sightly, even the first time, and will be
child's play to make one after a few days' practice.

_With Apples._--Peel two or three apples, cut them in thin, round
slices, fry them with a little butter, and take them from the pan; then
put a little more butter in the pan, and when hot, pour in it six beaten
eggs, in which you have mixed the slices of apples; cook, dish, and
serve as directed above.

_With Asparagus._--Cut the eatable part of the asparagus half an inch in
length, throw them in boiling water with a little salt, drain them when
cooked, and chop them fine; beat them with eggs and a little milk; have
hot butter in a frying-pan on a good fire; pour the eggs in, tossing
continually till done, and serve on a dish as directed.

_With Bacon._--Put two ounces of butter in a frying-pan; when melted,
add two ounces of bacon cut in dice; when turning brown and very hot,
pour in eight eggs, beaten as directed above; toss the pan nearly all
the time till done, and serve as directed.

_Au naturel._--Beat five eggs, with salt and pepper, as directed. Put
about an ounce of butter in a frying-pan on the fire, and when melted,
turn the eggs in; cook, dish, and serve as directed.

_Aux Fines Herbes._--Proceed as for _au naturel_ in every particular,
except that you beat with the eggs a tablespoonful of chopped parsley,
or parsley and chives, when handy; cook, dish, and serve in the same
way.

_Celestine._--Beat eight eggs as directed. Dip the point of a small
kitchen knife in water and cut with it little lumps of butter the size
of a pea and of any shape; about two ounces of it, drop them in the eggs
and beat a little to mix, then melt butter in a frying-pan and cook,
dish, and serve as directed.

_In the Oven._--When the omelet _au naturel_ or _Celestine_ is cooked
enough to commence folding, put the frying-pan in a quick oven for about
one minute and serve. The omelet swells and does not need folding, but
if it gains in bulk, it loses in taste.

_Jardiniere._--Chop fine, parsley, chives, onions, shallots, a few
leaves of sorrel, and a few sprigs of chervil; beat and mix the whole
well with beaten eggs; cook, dish, and serve as directed. It requires a
little more butter than if made with eggs only.

_With Cheese._--Grate some pine-apple or _Gruyere_ cheese, about two
ounces to four or five eggs, and mix and beat it with the eggs; then
make the omelet as directed.

_With Kidney._--_Saute_ as directed, till about half done, part of a
beef or calf's kidney, or one sheep's kidney, and mix it with beaten
eggs. Cook and serve as directed. It makes an excellent dish for
breakfast. The kidney may be cooked till done, and when the omelet is to
be folded in the pan, put five or six tablespoonfuls of the kidney on
the middle of the omelet, fold, dish, and serve as directed. When
dished, none of the kidney is seen, being under the omelet.

_With Mushrooms._--Cut mushrooms in pieces, and mix them, with beaten
eggs; then cook and serve them as directed. This also makes an excellent
dish for breakfast, especially if made with fresh mushrooms.

_With Sorrel._--Make an omelet _au naturel_ or _Celestine_, and serve it
on a _puree_ of sorrel. The same may be served on a _puree_ of tomatoes
or onions.

_With Lobster._--Cut two ounces of boiled lobster in small dice, mix it
well with beaten eggs, and cook and serve as directed.

_With Sugar._--Mix well the yolks of eight eggs with two ounces of fine
white sugar and a pinch of salt, and beat well the whites; then mix well
yolks, whites, and the rind of half a lemon, having the latter chopped
very fine. Put four ounces of butter in a frying-pan, and set it on the
fire; when melted, pour the eggs in, and toss and stir as directed. Then
dust a dish with fine white sugar, put the omelet on, then dust again
the upper side with the same; have ready a red-hot shovel, or any other
flat piece of iron, pass it over the top of the omelet, so as to color
it while melting the sugar, and serve warm. The whole process must be
performed quickly. The sugar may be beaten with the eggs whole; both
ways are good; it is only a question of taste.

_With Rum._--Make an omelet with sugar as above, and when on the table,
pour a gill or so of rum on it, set fire to it, and let it burn as long
as it can, taking slowly but continually with a silver spoon the rum
from the sides, and pouring it on the middle while it is burning, and
until it dies out by itself; then eat immediately.

_With Truffles._--Slice four ounces of truffles, beat them with six
eggs, a little milk, and a little salt and pepper. Put in a frying-pan
four ounces of butter, and set it on a good fire; when melted, pour the
eggs in, toss almost continually till done, and serve as directed for
omelets.

_With Ham._--Cut four ounces of ham in small dice, and set it on the
fire in a frying-pan with about two ounces of butter; stir, and while
the ham is frying, beat six eggs and turn them over the ham in the pan
when the latter is fried; stir with a fork, to cook the eggs as quickly
as possible; turn the part of the omelet nearest to you over the other
part by means of a fork, and serve like an omelet _au naturel_.

_With Boiled Ham._--Proceed as for the above in every particular, except
that you mix the ham with the eggs after the latter are beaten; put the
mixture in the frying-pan, and finish as the above.

_With Salt Pork (called omelet au Lard)._--Beat half a dozen eggs with a
fork. Cut four ounces of salt pork in dice, set it on the fire in a
frying-pan, and when nearly fried turn the eggs in; stir, and finish as
other omelets. Lean or fat salt pork (according to taste) may be used,
or both. If it is all lean, use some butter, otherwise it will burn.

_Soufflee._--Put in a bowl four ounces of pulverized sugar with four
yolks of eggs; then with a wooden spoon mix well and stir for two
minutes; add a few drops of essence to flavor. Beat the whites of four
eggs to a stiff froth in another bowl, and when you see that they are
beaten enough, turn two tablespoonfuls of the yolks and sugar into them,
and while still beating, but not as fast; then turn the rest of the
yolks and sugar into the whites, and mix gently with a wooden spoon.
Butter a tin or silver dish, turn the mixture into it, smooth or scallop
with the back of a knife, dust with sugar, and bake in an oven at about
310 deg.. It takes about twelve minutes to bake.

_Another._--Mix well six yolks of eggs with four ounces of sugar; beat
the six whites to a stiff froth and mix them with the rest, add some
lemon-rind chopped very fine or grated. Put four ounces of butter in a
crockery dish, set on a moderate fire, and when the butter is melted
pour the eggs in; stir with a fork, and as soon as you see some of the
mixture becoming hard, place the dish in a hot oven for about five
minutes; take off, dust with sugar, and serve.

_Macedoine, or a la Washington._--Make four omelets of four eggs each,
one with apples, one with asparagus or sorrel (according to the season),
a third with _fines herbes_, and the fourth _au naturel_; you serve them
on the same dish, one lapping over the other. It makes a fine as well as
a good dish.

This omelet, or rather these omelets, were a favorite dish with the
Father of his Country; they were very often served on his table when he
had a grand dinner. It is also served with the four following omelets:
_au naturel_, with salt pork, _fines herbes_, and with cheese.

_With Oysters._--Blanch a dozen oysters, drain, and beat with the eggs,
and then proceed as directed.

_With Tunny, or any kind of smoked or salt Fish._--Beat the eggs as
directed, using little or no salt; then chop the fish fine, mix and beat
it with the eggs, and cook as directed. It requires a little more butter
than if there were no fish. A few drops of lemon-juice may be added when
dished.

_With Sweetmeats._--Make an omelet _au naturel_, and when ready to be
folded in the pan, place on the middle of it two or three tablespoonfuls
of any kind of sweetmeats, then fold and serve.

Omelets are served as _entremets_ after the vegetables, and at
breakfast. All but four are served as _entremets_, and all are served at
breakfast; the four excepted are: with bacon, ham, salt pork, and
kidneys. By using different kinds of sweetmeats, an infinite number of
omelets can be made, and, except the _soufflee_, they are all made
alike.

_Macaroni._--This excellent article of food is now as well known here as
in Europe. The harder the wheat the better the macaroni. The
manufacturers of this country use Michigan flour in preference to any
other.

_To blanch._--Put about three pints of cold water and a little salt on
the fire, and at the first boiling drop half a pound of macaroni into
it; boil gently till tender but not soft. It takes about twenty minutes
to boil it, according to quality. A little butter, about two ounces, may
be added in boiling. As soon as tender, turn it into a colander, and it
is ready for use.

_Au Gratin._--Blanch the macaroni, and when drained put it on a tin or
silver dish, and mix with it a _Bechamel_ sauce; add salt, pepper, two
or three ounces of butter, a little nutmeg grated, about four ounces of
grated cheese, either pine-apple, _Gruyere_, or Parmesan; dust with
bread-crumbs, put about eight pieces of butter the size of a hazel-nut
here and there on the top, set in a warm but not quick oven till the top
turns rather brown, and serve warm as it is, that is, in the dish in
which it is. If in a tin dish, put it inside of another dish, and serve.

_A l'Italienne._--Blanch half a pound of macaroni and drain it. Put it
in a saucepan with four ounces of butter, and mix well by stirring the
butter in the warm macaroni. Then add also three or four tablespoonfuls
of gravy; mix again half a pint of tomato-sauce and grated cheese, as
for _au gratin_; set on the fire, stir, add salt to taste; keep on the
fire for about ten minutes, stirring now and then, and serve warm.

_Napolitaine._--This is the most expensive way of preparing macaroni.
Wealthy Italians have it prepared with beef a la mode gravy only, or
gravy made especially for it, with good lean beef cut in dice, and using
as many as twelve pounds of meat to make gravy for one pound of
macaroni, the meat being prepared as boiled beef afterward, but it can
be prepared with ordinary gravy.

Blanch four ounces of macaroni and drain as directed, then put it in a
saucepan with two ounces of butter, salt, pepper, a little grated
nutmeg, and set on the fire; stir till the butter is melted, and then
add grated cheese as directed for _au gratin_, and half a pint of gravy;
stir and mix for about ten minutes, and serve. Macaroni requires much
butter; the quantity of cheese is according to taste; some put weight
for weight of macaroni, butter, and cheese. It is also prepared in a
mould (_en timbale_) for _chartreuse_; it is macaroni _Napolitaine_,
when every thing is mixed with it; instead of leaving it ten minutes on
the fire, put it in the mould, set in the oven for about fifteen
minutes, turn over a dish, and serve warm. In using much cheese, the
macaroni will preserve the form of the mould when served.

_In Croquettes._--Proceed as for rice _croquettes_.

_Rice--to boil._--Wash half a pound of rice in water and drain it; put
it in a saucepan with one quart of broth taken from the top of the
broth-kettle, and before having skimmed off the fat; set on the fire,
boil gently for about fifteen minutes, or till rather underdone, and put
on a very slow fire to finish the cooking. Water and butter may be used
instead of broth. If the broth is absorbed or boiled away before the
rice is cooked, add a little more to keep it moist; add salt, pepper,
and nutmeg to taste, and it is ready for use.

_Another way._--When boiled, place it in a slow oven to dry it, and then
pour over it, little by little, stirring the while, four ounces of
melted butter.

_Another._--Wash half a pound of rice in cold water and drain it. Put it
in a saucepan with two quarts of cold water, salt, and the juice of two
lemons; boil six minutes, and drain; put it in a saucepan then with
about six ounces of melted butter; mix, cover the pan well, and put it
in a slow oven for about half an hour; take off and use.

Rice may be boiled in several different ways, or rather with several
ingredients. To the above ways, in India or other southern countries,
they add, besides salt and nutmeg, a teaspoonful of curry-powder to a
pound of rice. In Italy they add slices of ham, sausage, saffron, and
even Parmesan cheese. When cooked, chopped truffles may be added at the
same time with the butter. Oil is sometimes used instead of butter.

_In Border._--When thus prepared, take it with a spoon and place it all
around the dish, leaving room in the middle to serve a bird, and then
serve warm.

_Another way._--When prepared as above, put the rice in a mould for
border; the rice must be rather dry and the mould well buttered. Press
on it so as to fill the mould well, then put it in an oven at about 350
deg. Fahr. for ten or twelve minutes. Take off, place a dish on the
mould, turn it upside down, and remove the mould. The inside of a mould,
for border, is plain, but the outside and bottom are scalloped; the
bottom makes the top of the rice when served. There is an empty place in
the centre to hold a bird.

_Cake._--Butter a mould well and then dust it with sugar. Prepare rice
as directed for _croquettes_, and instead of spreading it on a dish to
cool, fill the mould about two-thirds full with it, and bake in a warm
but not quick oven for about half an hour. Serve on a dish. The mould
may be prepared with sugar only in this way: put pulverized sugar into
the mould, set it on a rather slow fire, and when turning rather brown
turn the mould round and round, so as to have it lined all over with
sugar; bake as above, turn over a dish, remove the mould, and serve hot
or cold, with or without a sauce for puddings.

_In Croquettes._--Wash four ounces of rice in cold water and set it on
the fire with a pint of milk and the rind of half a lemon; when done or
nearly so, the milk may be boiled away or absorbed by the rice; add a
little more to keep the rice nearly covered with it. When done, take off
and mix with it two tablespoonfuls of sugar, two ounces of butter, two
tablespoonfuls of milk, three yolks of eggs, a little pinch of salt, and
the same of nutmeg--the latter, if liked. Put back on the fire for one
minute, stirring the while. Spread the mixture on a dish and let cool.
If the _croquettes_ are for _breakfast_, the above may be done the
evening previous. When cold, stir the mixture, so as to mix the upper
part with the rest that is less dry. Put it in parts on the paste-board,
about a tablespoonful for each part. Have bread-crumbs on it, roll each
part of the shape you wish, either round, like a small sausage, or flat,
or of a chop-shape. Then dip each _croquette_ in beaten egg, roll in
bread-crumbs again, and fry in hot fat. (_See_ Frying.)

To shape them, roll each part round at first, and with a few
bread-crumbs; then with a knife you smooth both ends, while you roll
them round with the left hand; the two must be done at the same time.
When fried and in the colander, dust with sugar, and serve as warm as
possible. _Croquettes_ are generally served in pyramid. A napkin may be
spread on the platter, and the _croquettes_ served on it.

_In Fritters._--When a rice-cake is cold, it may be cut in pieces,
dipped in batter for fritters, fried (_see_ Frying), dusted with sugar,
and served hot.

_Souffle._--Prepare rice as directed for _croquettes_, and when ready to
be spread on a dish, add a few drops of essence to flavor; have five
whites of eggs beaten to a stiff froth, and mix them gently with it;
butter a mould well, fill it two-thirds full with the mixture, dust with
sugar and set in a warm but not quick oven, and serve as soon as brown
and raised. It takes from fifteen to twenty minutes. If the oven is
warmer under the cake than on the top, it would be necessary to place
something under the mould, the cake rises better and is lighter. This
cake, like every _souffle_, must be served promptly and before it falls.

_With Fruit._--This dish is excellent, sightly, easily made, and can be
varied infinitely. The rice is prepared as for _croquettes_, and is
used when ready to be spread over a dish to cool. The fruit, if it be
_apples_, _pears_, _plums_, etc., is stewed. One or several kinds may be
used for the same dish. It is served warm or cold, according to taste.
Place a layer of stewed fruit on a dish and then a layer of rice over
it; another layer of the same or of another stewed fruit, and over it a
layer of rice. Place as many layers as you fancy, imitating a pyramid,
and you have a fine dish.

_Rice-water._--This being often prescribed by doctors against
diarrhroea, we will give the receipt for it. See that the rice is clean,
but do not wash it. Put one pint of rice in a pan with a quart of cold
water, and boil gently till the rice is quite soft or a little overdone;
if the water boils away, fill up with cold water so as to have the rice
always covered by it. When done, mash it through a colander, put back on
the fire, add water to make it thin or thick, according to prescription;
as soon as warm, sweeten to taste with sugar or honey, and take cold or
warm, also according to prescription.

_Nouilles._--Put four tablespoonfuls of flour on the paste-board; make a
hole in the middle, and break two eggs in it, add a pinch of salt, and
knead well; then roll down to a thickness of one-twelfth of an inch;
dust it slightly with flour; cut it in strips about an inch wide; then
cut these strips across, so as to make fillets one inch long and
one-eighth of an inch broad. Spread the strips on a sieve for half an
hour, to dry them a little. Put cold water and a pinch of salt in a
saucepan, and set it on the fire; at the first boiling throw the
_nouilles_ in, boil two minutes, stirring occasionally; drain, throw
them in cold water and it is ready for use. It may be kept in cold water
half a day. _Nouilles_ are used to make soup, and are prepared in the
same and every way like macaroni.




  SWEET DISHES.


These are served both as _entremets_ and _dessert_. Many are _entremets_
at a grand dinner, and _dessert_ at a family dinner. As the name
indicates, sugar is one of the most important of the compounds used to
prepare them. It is used in syrup, the making of which is generally more
difficult than the rest of the operation.

The _father of cooks_, the great Careme, divides syrup, or the "cooking
of sugar," as he calls it, and as every practitioner has called it
since, into six degrees; each one corresponding to the six different
states into which the sugar passes, while on the fire, from the time it
begins to boil to that when it begins to turn _caramel_ or burned.

A copper pan is the best and handiest of all; it can be done in another,
but it is more difficult; the sugar turns brown before being thoroughly
cooked or reduced. Always use good loaf sugar. If it be necessary to
clarify it, do it in the following way: for five pounds of sugar, put
the white of an egg in a bowl with half a pint of water, and beat well
with an egg-beater; then turn into it nearly three pints of water, stir,
put away half a pint of it to be used afterward. Then add to the rest
five pounds of sugar, in lumps, set on a rather slow fire, and as soon
as it comes to a boil, mix with it the half pint put away, little by
little, skimming off carefully the while, and when no more scum gathers
on the surface, strain through a towel and commence the working. If the
sugar does not require to be clarified, that is, when it is good white
sugar, set five pounds of it on the fire, in a copper pan, with nearly
two quarts of water, and skim off carefully as soon as the scum gathers.
It may be stirred a little to cause the sugar to melt evenly, but as
soon as it commences to boil, stop stirring, else it will turn white and
stringy. It passes from one state or degree to another in a very short
time, and must be watched closely. It is at the _first_ degree when, by
dipping a piece of wood into it so as to retain a drop of it at the end,
and which you touch with another piece of wood--if, by pulling them
apart, slowly and immediately, instead of separating it at once, it
forms a thread, but that soon breaks. It marks then 34 at the
hydrometer. It is at the _second_ degree when, by repeating the same
process, the kind of thread formed does not break as easily as the
first. It marks then 36. It is at the _third_ degree when, by dipping a
skimmer in it, holding it horizontally and striking it on the pan, then
blowing on it, it forms small bubbles. It marks 39 at the hydrometer. It
is at the _fourth_ degree by trying again with the skimmer after a short
time, and when, instead of forming bubbles, it will fly away like
threads. It marks then 41. The _fifth_ degree is when, by dipping a
piece of wood in the sugar and quickly dipping it also in a bowl of cold
water, shaking it at the same time and then biting it; if it breaks
easily between the teeth, but at the same time is sticky, it has
attained the fifth degree, and marks 44. A few boilings more and it is
at the _sixth_ degree, and by trying in the same way as the preceding
one, it will break under the teeth, but will not stick to them. Above 44
the mark is uncertain, the syrup being too thick; it passes from that
state to that of _caramel_; is colored, and would burn immediately. When
that happens, make burnt sugar with it according to direction.

_Apples au Beurre._--Peel and core the apples with a fruit-corer. Cut
slices of stale bread about one-quarter of an inch in thickness, and
then cut them again of a round shape with a paste-cutter and of the size
of the apples. Spread some butter on each slice and place an apple on
each also. Butter a bakepan, place the apples and bread in, fill the
hole made in the middle of the apple to core it with sugar; place on the
top of the sugar and on each a piece of butter the size of a hazel-nut,
and set in a warm, but not quick oven. When about half done, fill the
hole again with sugar and a pinch of cinnamon, place butter on top as
before, and finish the cooking, serve warm. When done, they may be
glazed with apple-jelly and put back in the oven for two minutes; the
dish is more sightly.

_Flambantes._--Lay apples in a saucepan, after being peeled and cored,
add sugar to taste, and water enough just to cover them, also a stick of
cinnamon, and set on a rather slow fire, and leave till done. Take them
from the pan carefully and without breaking them; place them on a tin or
silver dish, forming a kind of pyramid or mound; turn the juice over
them, dust with sugar, pour good rum all over, set it on fire, and serve
immediately and warm. As soon as on fire it is placed on the table, and
the host must baste with the rum so as to keep it burning till all the
alcohol is exhausted, then serve.

The following cut represents either a dish of apples _flambantes_ before
being in flames, or apples with rice.

[Illustration]

_In Fritters._--Peel, core, and cut apples in slices, and then proceed
as directed for fritters. Serve hot.

_With Wine._--Proceed as for apples _flambantes_ in every particular
except that you slice the apples, and instead of pouring rum over, you
pour Madeira wine, and do not set it on fire.

_Meringues._--Peel, quarter, and core half a dozen apples; set them on
the fire in a saucepan with two tablespoonfuls of water; stir
occasionally till done, then mix with them two or three tablespoonfuls
of sugar, and when cold put them on a tin or silver dish; arrange them
as a mound on the middle of the dish. Beat three whites of eggs to a
stiff froth, and mix three ounces of pulverized sugar with them; spread
two thirds of that mixture all over and around the apples, smooth it
with a knife; then put the other third in a paper funnel, and by
squeezing it out, decorate the dish according to fancy. You may squeeze
some small heaps of the mixture here and there, over and around the
dish, or squeeze it out all around, giving it a rope-like shape. Dust
with sugar, and put in an oven at 250 degrees for twenty to twenty-five
minutes. Serve warm in the dish in which it has been baked.

_Charlotte._--Peel, quarter, and core six apples; put them in a pan with
two tablespoonfuls of water, cinnamon, and stew till done, when add
three or four ounces of sugar, mix gently so as not to mash the apples,
let cool. Butter a mould well, line it, bottom and sides, with strips of
stale bread, about one quarter of an inch thick, one inch broad, and of
a proper length for the mould. Fill till about half full with some of
the apples, then put a rather thin layer of any kind of sweetmeat on the
apples; finish the filling up with apples; cover with pieces of stale
bread, bake in an oven at about 340 degrees for about twenty minutes,
turn over on a dish, remove the mould, and serve hot.

_With Sweetmeats._--Prepare apples _au beurre_, and when ready to be
served, fill the hole with any kind of sweetmeats or with currant-jelly.
Serve warm.

_In Pine-Apple._--Core the apples with a fruit-corer and then peel them
with the scalloped knife (the peels are used to make syrup or jelly),
place them tastefully on a dish, so that they will form a pyramid,
filling the place where the core was with sugar and a little cinnamon;
then pour a little apple-syrup on the whole, and bake. When done, pour a
little more syrup over, and serve cold or warm.

_Apple-Syrup._--Peel, quarter, and core four or six apples, of the
pippin variety; cook them well in about a pint of water, a wine-glass of
brandy, and a pinch of grated cinnamon; when well cooked, put them in a
coarse towel, and press the juice out; put it in a stewpan and set it on
a good fire; add a pound of loaf-sugar, take the foam off with a skimmer
a little before it boils, and boil about five minutes; take from the
fire, let cool, bottle it, corking well. It may be kept for months.
Syrup with pears, pine-apple, etc., is made in the same way.

_Blanc-Mange._--Set on the fire in a block-tin saucepan one quart of
milk with the rind of a lemon and two tablespoonfuls of sugar; stir
occasionally to melt the sugar. Then mix about six ounces of
corn-starch with half a pint of milk in a bowl. As soon as the milk
rises, take it from the fire; take off with a skimmer the rind of lemon,
and the skin that has formed on the top of the milk; put the milk back
on the fire; turn the corn-starch into it, stir continually and very
fast till it is very thick. It will take hardly a minute to get thick.
Turn into a mould wetted with cold water and put away to cool. When
perfectly cold, serve with the following sauce: Mix well in a tin
saucepan two ounces of sugar and two yolks of eggs, then add half a pint
of milk and mix again; set on the fire; stir continually, give one boil;
take off; let cool, and serve.

_Blanc-Manger._--Throw in boiling water two ounces of sweet almonds and
the same of bitter ones, or pour boiling water over them, and then skin
them as soon as the skin comes off easily. Pound them well with four
ounces of sugar, lay the whole in a pan with about a pint of water, set
on the fire, and when on the point of boiling, take off and strain. Put
in a tin saucepan about a pint of milk, the strained juice, an ounce of
gelatin, a little rind of lemon, and a little nutmeg, both grated; set
the whole on a moderate fire; simmer just enough to melt the gelatin and
mix it with the rest, and then strain. Wet a mould with cold water, put
the mixture in it, set it on ice, and serve when cool. It may be served
with a sauce like the above.

_Charlotte Russe._--Wipe a mould well, see that it is dry, and then line
the bottom and sides with lady's-fingers, or sponge cake cut in pieces
about the size of a lady's-finger. Commence by lining the bottom,
placing the pieces so as to form a star or rosette, or plain, according
to fancy. Then place some of them upright all around, rather tight, and
even with the top of the mould. Fill with cream, well whipped,
sweetened, and flavored with essence; place the mould on ice, and when
ready to serve, place a dish on it, turn upside down, remove the mould,
and serve as it is, or decorated.

_To decorate._--Make a paper funnel, fill it with cream, or icing (sugar
and white of egg worked), then spread some all over the top according to
fancy; it is quickly done and is sightly. The mould may also be filled
with some other cream; as _creme legere_, _creme cuite_, etc.

_Charlotte a la Chantilly._--It is a _Charlotte_ made exactly as the
above one, but filled with _creme a la Chantilly_.

_A la Polonaise._--Make a sponge cake, cut it transversely, dip each
piece in cream (any kind) and then place them back where they were so as
to give the cake its original form as near as possible. When thus
re-formed, cover it with cream, dust with sugar, and decorate with any
kind of sweetmeats. Besides the sweetmeats that are placed here and
there all around, some currant-jelly may also be used to decorate. Place
on ice for some time, and serve.

_Italian._--Peel, quarter, and core about a quart of pears and set them
on a rather slow fire, in a saucepan with half a pint of white wine,
sugar, cinnamon, and lemon-rind. While they are cooking, line a mould as
for _Charlotte Russe_, remove the lemon-rind, and fill the mould with
the pears; place it on ice when cool, turn over on a dish, remove the
mould, decorate with icing, or cover entirely with apple-jelly, and
serve. It is also made with _genoise_ cake instead of sponge cake.

_Francaise._--This is prepared and served like a _Charlotte Russe_, with
the exception that it is filled with _blanc manger_ or _fromage a la
creme_ instead of cream.

_Of Fruit._--This is made of cherries or any kind of berries; cherries
must be stoned carefully. Dip the fruit in wine-jelly as soon as the
latter is cool, but not firm, and line a mould with it. By having the
mould on ice it will be more easily done. Fill the mould with cream, as
for _Charlotte Russe_, place on ice, and serve as soon as congealed.
When the mould is taken from the ice, dip it in warm water a few
seconds, place a dish over it, turn upside down, remove it, and serve
immediately. A _Charlotte_ of fruit is sightly enough without
decorations; it requires some time to make it, but it is worth the
trouble, being a handsome as well as a good dish.

_Another._--Line a mould as for the above. Put one ounce of gelatin in a
bowl with about three tablespoonfuls of water and leave it so for about
half an hour. Mix well together in a saucepan four yolks of eggs and
three ounces of pulverized sugar, add about three tablespoonfuls of
milk, and mix again; set on the fire and stir for about three minutes,
add the gelatin, stir again, give one boil, and put away to cool a
little. Beat four whites of eggs to a stiff froth, turn the above
mixture into them, mix gently again; fill the mould with the whole,
place on ice till perfectly cold. When cold, turn upside down on a dish,
remove the mould, decorate as the preceding one, and serve cold.

_Cheese with Cream--(Fromage a la Creme_).--This is made in different
ways; sometimes with soft curds only, or with curds and cream, or with
cream only when very thick. Gelatin dissolved in a little water may also
be added. The curds or cream, or both, are beaten with an egg-beater,
sweetened to taste with sugar, and flavored with essence. To make it
more sightly, when beaten and flavored, it is moulded, placed on ice to
make it firm, and then turned over a dish, the mould removed, and then
served. Any kind of essence may be used to flavor it, such as vanilla,
_fleur d'oranger_, rose-water, violet, etc.; it may also be made with
coffee, tea, chocolate, orange, lemon, etc. Put a few drops of very
strong coffee, or tea, or chocolate at the same time with the sugar and
essence.

With orange or lemon, rub them on a piece of sugar, which you pound and
use to sweeten the cheese. Three or more different ones may be made with
a quart of curds; for instance, flavor one third of it with essence,
another third with coffee or chocolate, and the other with orange. The
colors will be different also. It is an excellent and refreshing
_entremets_ in summer-time. Cheese may also be flavored with pine-apple
cut in very small dice and mixed with it instead of essence.

_Compotes, or Jams.--How to make syrup for Compotes.--Common
Syrup._--Put a pound of loaf-sugar in a crockery stewpan, with a pint of
water, a wine-glass of brandy, and a pinch of well-grated cinnamon; set
it on a slow fire, boil gently for ten minutes, skimming off the foam;
then take from the fire and let cool; bottle it; cork it well and keep
it to use when wanted. It may be kept for months in a cool and dry
place.

Stewed fruit of any kind is called either _compote_ or jam. They are
first peeled and cored and then cooked with sugar, water, and sometimes
cinnamon, or cloves, both in powder and according to taste; also
lemon-juice or rind to taste. Cinnamon agrees well with any kind of
apples, but is not liked by every one in every kind of fruit. The fruits
may be cooked and served whole, in halves, or quarters, or mashed,
according to fancy and taste. The proportions of water and sugar are
also according to taste, or according to the nature or state of the
fruit. Sour apples require more sugar than sweet ones, unripe berries
require more also than ripe ones. The preparation is very simple; not
being prepared to keep, they are served as soon as cold. They may be
served warm, but they are certainly not as good. When there is not syrup
(juice) enough, pour some of the above over the fruit, or some
apple-syrup. The peels and cores of the apples may be used to make
syrup, together with those of pears.

While peeling, coring, or cutting fruit, drop each in cold water, else
it changes color and is unsightly.

When cold, the _compote_ may be put in a mould; turn over a dish, remove
the mould, and serve. Several kinds may be served on the same dish as
well as one; being of different colors, the dish is more sightly, and
quite as good. Loaf-sugar is the best.

Instead of cooking them with water, etc., as directed above, put some
syrup on the fire, and as soon as it boils, drop the prepared fruit in
it, and boil slowly till done.

_Of Apples._--Quarter, peel, core, and put apples in a stewpan with a
gill of water for two quarts, sugar and cinnamon to taste; when done,
dish them, pour the juice in the stewpan all over, and serve cold. If
there is not juice enough, add some apple-syrup.

_Of Apricots or Peaches._--Take two quarts of apricots or peaches and
cut them in two, remove the stones. Throw them in boiling water for two
minutes and take off; drop in cold water and take out immediately, then
skin them. Put about half a pint of water in a crockery pan or in a
well-lined one, and at the first boil put the peaches in, with sugar to
taste; boil gently till done, turn the whole over a dish, and serve
cold. If there is not juice or syrup enough, add a little common syrup.

_Of Blackberries, Currants, Raspberries, Strawberries, and other like
Berries._--Prepare syrup of sugar, and when at the second, third, or
fourth state, throw the berries in; boil from one to five minutes,
according to the kind, take from the fire, and serve when cold.

_Of Cherries._--Cut off the stalks of the cherries about half their
length, wash well and drain them. Put them in a stewpan in which there
is just enough syrup at the first degree to cover them; boil slowly till
cooked, and serve.

_Of Oranges._--Peel four oranges, and divide each carpel without
breaking it, and then throw them in syrup of sugar at the fourth or
fifth degree, and boil slowly three or four minutes; take from the fire,
let cool, and serve.

_Of Pears._--Peel the pears, cut the stem half its length, put them in a
stewpan with a little sugar, a few drops of lemon-juice, a pinch of
cinnamon, and a little water. Set on a moderate fire, and at the first
boiling add two gills of claret wine. Simmer till cooked, then put the
pears only on a dish; set the stewpan back on the fire, add to the juice
in it about the same quantity of syrup of pears or of syrup of sugar at
the third degree, boil fifteen minutes longer, pour the whole on the
pears, and serve warm or cold.

_Of Lemons._--Peel the lemons, cut them in pieces, remove the seeds, and
proceed as for that of oranges, boiling a little longer.

_Of Pine-Apple._--Peel and cut in slices, put them in a crockery pan,
with a little water and sugar, set on a good fire, and finish and serve
like apricots.

_Of Plums._--Throw the plums in boiling water, and take them out when
half cooked; put them in a crockery stewpan, with a little water and a
little sugar; simmer till cooked, place them on a dish, pour some
common syrup on, and serve when cold.

_Of Quinces._--Quarter, peel, and core the quinces; throw them in
boiling water for five minutes; take out and drain them; put them in a
crockery stewpan, with four ounces of sugar for every pound of quinces,
a few drops of lemon-juice, a little water, and a pinch of grated
cinnamon; set it on the fire, simmer till cooked, place them on a dish,
pour some common syrup on them, and serve cold.

_Of Chestnuts._--Roast about one quart of chestnuts, remove the skin and
pith, lay them in a pan with half a gill of water and four ounces of
sugar; set on a slow fire, toss now and then till the sugar and water
are absorbed or evaporated, turn over a dish, dust with sugar, and serve
warm or cold. A few drops of lemon-juice may be added just before
dusting with sugar.

_Cold Compote._--Wash strawberries and raspberries in cold water, drain
dry, and place them on a dish. Pour boiling common syrup or boiling
currant-jelly all over; let cool, and serve.

_Of Cranberries._--Put one pint of water in a tin saucepan, with six
ounces of loaf-sugar, the rind of half a lemon, and set it on the fire;
boil down until, by dipping a spoon in it, it adheres to it. Then throw
in it about one pint of cranberries; boil about twelve minutes, stirring
now and then, take off, let cool, and serve.

_Another._--After having boiled ten minutes in the same way as above,
and with the same proportions of sugar, cranberries, etc., take from the
fire, mash through a fine colander or sieve, put back on the fire, boil
gently five minutes, let cool, and serve.

_Creams or Cremes au Citron_ (_with Lemon_).--Put one pint of milk in a
tin saucepan with the rind of a lemon; set on the fire, and as soon as
it rises place an iron spoon in it and boil gently five minutes; take
from the fire. Mix well in a bowl four ounces of sugar with four yolks
of eggs, then turn the milk into the bowl, little by little, stirring
and mixing at the same time. Strain the mixture and put it in small
cups; put the cups in a pan of boiling water, boil gently for about ten
minutes, and put in the oven as it is, that is, leaving the cups in the
water. The cups must not be more than half covered with water, else the
water will fly into it. It takes from ten to fifteen minutes to finish
the cooking in the oven, according to the size of the cups. Take them
from the oven when the _creme_ is rather firm, except a little spot in
the middle, and which you ascertain by moving the cups.

Anyone with an ordinary amount of intelligence can make creams as well
as the best cooks, after having tried only two or three times. When you
know how to make one, you can make fifty, just by using different
flavorings.

_Au Cafe (with Coffee_).--The stronger the coffee the better the cream.
The most economical way of making strong coffee is: when you intend to
have cream with coffee for dinner, put the first drops that fall, when
you make the coffee for breakfast, into a glass; put it immediately in
cold water, and as soon as cool cover it with paper, which you tie
around it with twine, and use when you make the cream.

Always use good fresh milk and fresh eggs. As soon as the whites of the
eggs are separated from the yolks, put them, together with the shells,
on ice, and use the next day to clarify your jellies, or to make icing,
etc. A little care is a great saving in the kitchen.

Put one quart of milk in a milk-pan on the fire and take off as soon as
it rises. While the milk is on the fire, mix well together in a bowl
eight yolks of eggs with half a pound of sugar, and coffee to flavor;
then turn the milk into the mixture, little by little, stirring the
while; when the whole is thoroughly mixed, strain it. Put the mixture in
cream-cups, place the cups in a pan of boiling water--enough water to
half cover them; boil slowly for about ten minutes, put the pan and cups
in a moderately-heated oven, and take off when done. It takes from ten
to fifteen minutes to finish the cooking, according to the size of the
cups. It is done when the whole is solidified except a little spot in
the centre, which, by moving the cups, will shake somewhat. Serve cold.

_With Burnt Sugar._--Put two ounces of sugar in a small tin pan, with a
tablespoonful of water, set on the fire, and boil till burnt and of a
light-brown color; take off, and put it in a stewpan with a pint of
milk, four ounces of white sugar, a few drops of rose or orange-flower
water; boil ten minutes, stirring occasionally; take from the fire, beat
the yolks of two eggs, and one entire, put in the pan and mix the whole
well, then strain, after which you put the mixture in small cream-pots
for that purpose; place them in a hot but not boiling _bain-marie_, and
as soon as it thickens take them out, dust them with fine white sugar,
let cool; place them on ice for about fifteen minutes, and then it is
ready to be served.

_With Chocolate._--Put in a stewpan and on a moderate fire six ounces of
chocolate, three tablespoonfuls of water, three ounces of white sugar,
stir now and then with a wooden spoon till melted; then pour in it,
little by little, a quart of good fresh milk; boil ten minutes, take
from the fire, and mix in it one egg well beaten with the yolks of five
others; strain through a fine sieve, put in cream-pots or cups, place
them in a hot but not boiling _bain-marie_, take off as soon as it
thickens, dust with fine white sugar, let cool, place on ice for about
fifteen minutes, and use.

_With Orange._--Use orange-rind, and proceed as for lemon-cream in every
other particular.

_With Tea._--Proceed with strong tea as for cream _au cafe_ in every
other particular.

_With Essence._--Make cream _au cafe_, with the exception that, instead
of using coffee to flavor, you use a few drops of vanilla, rose-water,
orange-flower water, violet, cinnamon, etc.--any kind of essence, to
taste.

_With Cinnamon._--Beat well together in a bowl about an ounce of
potato-starch, a teaspoonful of cinnamon, four eggs, four ounces of
sugar, and milk enough to make a rather liquid batter. Turn the mixture
into a mould, which put into a pan of boiling water for fifteen minutes,
then place in the oven till cooked. Serve cold.

_Cuite._--Put two ounces of sugar in a tin pan with two eggs, and mix
well; then add an ounce of flour, little by little, mixing the while;
then, in the same way, add also about a pint of boiled milk; set on the
fire, stir continually till it turns rather thick; take off, flavor with
essence to taste, let cool, and serve or use for filling.

_Frangipane._--Set one pint of milk on the fire. Mix well together in
another pan three tablespoonfuls of sugar, two of flour, three eggs,
three macaroons crumbled, and as soon as the milk rises, turn the
mixture into it, little by little, stirring and mixing the while; keep
stirring about three minutes; take off, add a few drops of essence to
flavor; turn into a bowl, let cool, and it is ready for use. It may be
made without the macaroons.

_With Almonds._--Make as the above, with the exception that you use
sweet almonds, chopped fine, instead of macaroons.

_With Hazel-nuts._--Proceed as above, using hazel-nuts instead of
almonds.

_Legere._--Mix well together in a tin saucepan five yolks of eggs and
five ounces of sugar; add four tablespoonfuls of milk, and mix again.
Set the pan on the fire, and stir continually till it turns rather
thick; take off, and add a few drops of essence; turn into a plate or
dish and let cool. When cold, beat five whites of eggs to a stiff froth;
have somebody to pour in the whites, and, while you are still beating,
about two tablespoonfuls of the cold mixture, and stop beating. Then
turn the rest of the mixture into the whites, and mix the whole together
gently; do not stir too much, but move round and round with a wooden
spoon, and it is done. If it is stirred too much, it may become too
liquid. It makes an excellent and light cream.

_Patissiere._--Beat four whites of eggs to a stiff froth, and then mix
about one ounce of pulverized sugar with them. Put four yolks of egg in
a bowl with half a gill of milk, and beat well till thoroughly mixed.
Put in a saucepan about two ounces of pulverized sugar, with a
teaspoonful of potato-starch (_fecula_), and two-thirds of a gill of
milk, and mix the whole well; then add the eggs and milk, and beat the
whole well with an egg-beater. Set the pan on a rather slow fire, stir
continually with a wooden spoon till it turns rather thick, and then
turn the four whites and sugar into the pan also, little by little,
stirring the while, and take off when thoroughly mixed. As soon as off
the fire, add essence to flavor, and about one-quarter of an ounce of
gelatine, dissolved in tepid water. Serve, or use to fill when cold.

_Renversee._--Make cream with tea, coffee, or chocolate, and instead of
turning the mixture into cream pots, turn it into a mould lined with
burnt sugar; place the mould in boiling water for about fifteen minutes,
place it in the oven to finish the cooking, turn over a dish, remove the
mould, and serve cold. To line the mould, put two or three
tablespoonfuls of pulverized sugar in it; set it on a slow fire, and
when the sugar is melted and turning brown, move the mould round and
round to spread the sugar all over; then put the cream in it.

_Sweet Cream._--We mean here the oily substance which forms a scum on
milk; also called _whipped cream_. It is used to make Charlotte Russe,
to fill _meringues_, _choux_, or cream-cakes, etc.

Put a pint of good thick cream in a bowl, and if the weather is warm,
place the bowl on ice for half an hour, then beat the cream with an
egg-beater till stiff and thick. If the cream does not become stiff
after having beaten it fifteen or twenty minutes at the longest, it is
not good, or it is too warm. Good cream may rise and become stiff in
five minutes. When beaten, add to it about four ounces of pulverized
sugar, which you mix gently with it, not stirring too much; add also a
few drops of essence to flavor. If wanted very stiff, add also, after
the sugar, half an ounce of gelatin, melted in a little tepid water.
When beaten and mixed, if not used immediately, it must be put on ice.

_Chantilly._--It is the above cream flavored with _fleur d'orange_
(orange-flower water), or with essence of violet.

_Ice Cream._--Made with cream it is richer than with milk. With eggs it
is better and richer than without, and those that advocate it without
eggs, either have no palate, or do not know how to use them in making
it.

The addition of starch, fecula, arrow-root, flour, meal, etc., spoils
it. The proportions are, to a quart of milk or cream: from four to six
eggs; from eight to fourteen ounces of pulverized sugar; essence, or
chocolate, or fruit-jelly to flavor and color. Our receipt is for six
eggs and fourteen ounces of sugar to a quart of milk.

Set the milk on the fire, and when it comes to a boil, mix well half the
sugar and the essence with six yolks and three whites of eggs; beat the
three other whites separately to a stiff froth. As soon as the milk
rises, take it from the fire, put half the sugar in it and stir to melt
it, then turn the mixture into it also, little by little, beating the
while with an egg-beater; set on the fire, and take off at the first
boiling. While on the fire it must be beaten gently, as, if it is
allowed to boil, the eggs may curdle. As soon as off the fire, mix the
three whites with the rest, beating with an egg-beater, just enough to
mix the whole well; put in cold, salt water to cool, and then freeze.

The smaller the ice is broken and mixed with plenty of rock-salt, the
quicker it freezes.

_Custard._--Put four yolks of eggs in a bowl, then sprinkle flour on
them, little by little, stirring and mixing well the while with a wooden
spoon, and when the mixture is rather thick, stop sprinkling flour, but
sprinkle milk, and mix again in the same way till the mixture is liquid;
add sugar and essence to taste, beat the four whites to a stiff froth,
mix them gently with the rest; butter a mould well, fill it about
two-thirds full with the mixture, and set in a warm but not quick oven.
Serve as soon as out of the oven. If intended to be served cold, omit
the whites of eggs.

_Fritters._--These are made with every kind of fruit, when ripe, peeled
and stoned, or cored when necessary, and according to the kind. The
fruit is used whole, such as strawberries and the like; or in slices,
such as apples, pears, etc.; or in halves, like peaches, plums, etc. It
may be used as soon as prepared; or may be soaked a few hours in a
mixture of sugar, brandy, or rum, and lemon-rind.

Have _batter for fritters_ made in advance, and while you are preparing
the fruit heat the fat (_see_ Frying), dip each fruit or each slice in
batter, drop it in the fat, stir and turn over, and when done, turn into
a colander, dust well with fine white or pulverized sugar, and serve as
warm (or rather as hot) as possible. Even the best fritters served cold
make a very poor dish. Besides fruit, the blossoms of the acacia and
those of the violet make the most delicate fritters.

_With Bread or Pain perdu._--Set one pint of milk on the fire with two
ounces of sugar, and the rind of half a lemon, stir now and then, and
when it rises add a few drops of essence to flavor, then take off and
soak in it slices of bread, cut with a paste-cutter and about half an
inch thick. When well soaked, drain; dip them in beaten egg, roll in
bread-crumbs, and fry and serve as fritters.

_Glazed Fruit--Oranges glazed._--Oranges or any other fruit glazed, when
mounted in a pyramid, is called _croque en bouche_.

Peel the oranges; then divide the carpels and free them from the pith,
and put them away in a warm place for a few hours; they may be left over
night. Cut very fine wire in pieces about eight inches long, bend each
piece at both ends, forming a hook; then run one end or hook through the
carpel of orange, and hang it on a stick placed on something
horizontally. In order not to spill any of the juice, hook the orange
near the edge of that part that was the centre of the orange before
being divided, and as the other end of the wire forms a hook also, it is
easy to hang it.

Prepare syrup of sugar, and when at the sixth degree take it from the
fire, dip each carpel of orange into it and hang it again, and so on for
the whole. As soon as dry enough to handle them, which takes hardly half
a minute, pull off the wire and serve when perfectly cold.

To mount them in pyramid is not difficult, but requires time. When they
are cold, prepare again the same syrup of sugar as above, and take it
from the fire. While the sugar is on the fire take a tin mould, a plain
one, larger at the top than at the bottom, and slightly grease it with
sweet-oil. A convenient size for a family is, seven inches high, six
inches broad at the top, and only four inches at the bottom.

Place one carpel of orange, resting on the bottom of the mould, along
the side and the edge upward; as soon as the sugar is out of the fire,
dip one of the two ends of another carpel into it, the edge only, and
immediately place it as the first one, and touching it. The syrup being
hot and liquid, the two pieces will adhere; do the same with others till
you have one row around the bottom. Commence a second row as you did the
first, but this time the first carpel you place must be dipped in sugar,
in order to adhere to the first row, and all the others must also be
dipped so as to adhere not only to the first piece placed, but also to
the first row; and so on for each row till the mould is full, or till
you have as much as you wish. As soon as cold, place a dish on the
mould, turn upside down, and remove the mould. You have then a sightly
dish, but not better than when served only glazed.

_Another way to make it._--Grease with oil your marble for pastry, place
the same mould as above over it but upside down, that is, the broader
end down; grease the outside also with oil. Then place the rows of
carpels of oranges all around outside of it, and in the same way as
described above. The _croque en bouche_ is more easily made this last
way, but it is more difficult to remove the mould. Mould and fruit must
be turned upside down carefully, after which the mould is pulled off.

If the syrup gets cold, it hardens, and cannot be used; in that state,
add a little water and put it back on the fire, but it is difficult to
rewarm it; generally it colors and is unfit. When that happens, make
burnt sugar with it, or a _nougat_. It is better and safer to make a
little of it, just what can be used before it gets cold, and if not
enough, make some a second and even a third time. While the sugar is
hot, and while you are dipping the fruit in it, be careful not to touch
it, as it burns badly. In glazing the fruit first, some syrup falls in
taking it from the pan to the stick; place your marble board, greased
with oil, under, so that you can pick it without any trouble and use it.

_Chestnuts, glazed._--Roast the chestnuts, skin them well, then hook,
dip, and hook again on the stick as directed for pieces of oranges. A
pyramid also may be made, and a sightly one it makes.

_Cherries._--They must be picked with their stems, and by which you tie
two together with a piece of twine. See that they are clean and dry, and
have two sticks instead of one, placed parallel, about two inches apart,
in order to prevent the two cherries from touching, when hung, as they
would immediately adhere. Proceed for the rest as described for oranges.

_Pears._--Small, ripe pears are excellent glazed; peel them, but leave
the stem on, and then proceed as with cherries in every particular.

_Strawberries or any other Berries._--The berries must be picked with
the stem. Wash them in cold water, drain, dry, or wipe carefully, and
then proceed as for cherries in every particular. A more delicate dish
than strawberries or raspberries glazed cannot be made.

_Grapes._--When clean, proceed as described for cherries.

_Plums._--Take plums, well ripened and with the stems on, and proceed as
with cherries.

_Prunes._--Soak the prunes in tepid water, and when dry, hook them like
carpels of orange, and finish in the same manner.

_Currants._--When clean and dry, tie two clusters together, and proceed
as for cherries.

_Pine-Apple._--Cut pine-apple in dice, and proceed as described for
carpels of orange.

_Iced Fruit._--As a general rule, the more watery the fruit the more
reduced the syrup of sugar must be. If it is not reduced enough, small
pieces of ice, formed by the water of the fruit, will be found while
eating it. The fruit must be ripe. It is done also with preserved fruit.
It is impossible to tell exactly the degree or state of the fruit and
syrup without a hydrometer.

The following _preparation_ may be added to the fruit, or to _punch_, as
soon as it begins to freeze; it is not indispensable, but gives it more
body: Put one pound of loaf-sugar in a copper pan with two gills of cold
water, set on the fire, stir now and then till it comes to a boil, then
boil till it is at the fifth state or 43 deg., and take off. Beat four
whites of eggs to a stiff froth, flavor with essence of vanilla, and
turn the sugar into the eggs, little by little, but do not stop beating
until the whole is in. Then move the mixture gently round with a spoon
for about a minute, and it is ready for use.

_With Peaches, Apricots, or Plums._--The following proportions are for
one pint of juice. Peel and stone the fruit carefully, then mash it
through a sieve into a bowl. Make one pint of syrup of sugar at 32 deg., and
when cold turn it into the bowl and mix it with the pint of juice, add
the juice of a rather large orange and a little of the rind grated, mix
again, freeze as directed for ice-cream, and serve.

_With Currants, Lemons, Oranges, Pears, Pine-Apples, Strawberries, and
other Berries._--Proceed as for peaches in every particular, except that
you press the juice of the currants and berries through a towel instead
of mashing them through a sieve, and that you use the syrup at 44 deg. for
them also; the others are peeled and cored or seeded.

_With Melons._--Proceed as for peaches, except that you add to the
mixture a little _kirschwasser_.

_With Preserved Fruit._--Use the syrup at 30 deg., and proceed as for
peaches in every other particular.

_Iced Coffee._--Make strong coffee, and when cold mix it with the same
volume of thick cream, sweeten to taste, freeze, and serve.

_Iced Chocolate._--Break in pieces about four ounces of chocolate, and
set it on a slow fire in a tin pan, with two tablespoonfuls of water;
when melted take it from the fire, add a gill of warm water, and work it
with a spoon for five minutes; then mix it with the same volume of syrup
of sugar at 30 deg., freeze and serve. The syrup is used when cold.

_Iced Tea_ is made as iced coffee.

_Sweet Jellies--Wine Jelly._--Soak two ounces of gelatin in a gill of
cold water for about half an hour. Put in a block-tin saucepan three
eggs and shells, three ounces of sugar, one quart of cold water; beat a
little with an egg-beater to break the eggs, and mix the whole together;
add also a few drops of burnt sugar, same of essence, rum, according to
taste, from half a gill to half a pint, then the gelatin and water in
which it is; set on a good fire, stirring slowly with an egg-beater, and
stopping once in a while to see if it comes to a boil, when, stop
stirring, keep boiling very slowly for two or three minutes, and turn
into the jelly-bag, which you do as soon as clear; the process requires
from two to three minutes. While it is boiling take a few drops with a
spoon, and you will easily see when it is clear. Pass it through the bag
three or four times, turn into a mould, put on ice, and when firm, put a
dish on it, turn upside down, remove the mould, and serve.

_Jelly Macedoine._--Make the same jelly as above, and pass it through
the bag also; put some in a mould, say a thickness of half an inch, have
the mould on ice; then, as soon as it is firm, place some fruit on that
layer and according to fancy; and, with a tin ladle, pour more jelly
into the mould, but carefully and slowly, in order not to upset the
fruit you have in; continue pouring till you have a thickness of about
half an inch on the fruit. Repeat this as many times as you please, and
till the mould is full; vary the fruit at each layer, and especially the
color of the different kinds. The color of the jelly may also be changed
at every layer, by mixing in it more burnt sugar, some carmine or
cochineal, some green spinach, a little in one layer and more in
another. Any kind of ripe fruit can be used: strawberries, raspberries,
stoned cherries, grapes, apples cut in fancy shapes; also peaches,
bananas, etc.

_Cold Wine-Jelly._--Put two ounces of gelatin in a bowl with a piece of
cinnamon and a pint of cold water, and let stand about an hour. Then
pour over about a quart of boiling water, and let stand about four
minutes. After that, add two pounds of sugar, the juice of three lemons,
a pint of sherry wine, and half a gill of brandy. Stir to dissolve the
sugar, and turn the mixture into a mould through a strainer; place on
ice, and serve as the above jellies.

_Souffles._--Put in a bowl four tablespoonfuls of potato-starch with
three yolks of eggs, one ounce of butter, and a few drops of essence to
flavor. Turn into it, little by little, stirring the while, about three
gills of milk; set on the fire, stir continually, and take off at the
first boiling. Stir continually but slowly. As soon as cold, beat three
yolks of eggs with a tablespoonful of cold water, and mix them with the
rest. Beat four whites of eggs to a stiff froth, and mix them also
gently and slowly. Butter a mould well, fill it about two-thirds full,
and bake in a warm but not quick oven (about 300 deg. Fahr.). Besides being
flavored with essence, _souffles_ may be flavored with coffee, lemon,
orange, etc., according to taste. Generally, _souffles_ are served under
the name of the object used to flavor them, such as _souffle au cafe_
(_souffle_ flavored with strong coffee), etc. They are all made in the
same way as the above one, with the exception that they are flavored
with strong coffee as above, and used instead of essence, or strong tea,
chocolate, etc., or with a little jelly of different fruit, or with
roasted chestnuts well pounded, instead of potato-starch, etc.

A hundred different kinds of _souffles_ can be easily made by following
the above directions.

_Apples, fried._--Peel and cut in small dice, dropping them in cold
water till the whole is ready. Then fry with a little butter till about
half cooked, when add a little water and sugar to taste; finish the
cooking, take from the fire; beat a yolk of egg with a teaspoonful of
cold water and mix it with the apples; serve warm. Proceed in the same
way with _pears_.

_Peaches baked._--Cut peaches in two, remove the stone, and with a
paste-cutter cut some slices of bread, and place them in a buttered
bakepan with half of a peach on each, the skin downward; dust well with
sugar, put a piece of butter the size of a kidney-bean on each, place in
a rather slow oven; dish when cooked, turn the juice over, if any; if
none, a little syrup of pears, and serve warm.

Do the same with _apricots_, _plums_, and slices of _pine-apples_. The
slices of pine-apples may be soaked in _kirschwasser_ for twenty-four
hours before using them.

_Prunes, stewed._--Wash them in cold water if necessary. Soak them in
tepid water for about two hours, and set the whole on the fire; boil
gently till half done, when add sugar to taste, a gill of claret wine to
half a pound of prunes, and serve either warm or cold when done. If the
water boils away too much, add more.

_Currants, Blackberries, or other Fruit, for Dessert._--Beat well the
white of an egg with a little water; dip the fruit in, and roll it
immediately in some fine-crushed sugar; place it on a dish, and leave it
thus five or six hours, and serve.

A more sightly and exquisite plate of dessert than a plate of currants
dressed thus, cannot be had.

Besides all our receipts, any kind of fruit may be served for dessert,
according to the season; also any kind of cheese; also fruits preserved
in liquor.

_Berries with Milk or Cream._--Nearly every kind of berries, when clean,
may be served with milk or cream, and sugar to taste.

_With Liquor._--They may also be served with brandy, rum,
_kirschwasser_, whiskey, etc., and sugar.

_Marmalades, or Preserves of Fruits--Of Apricots or Peaches._--Boil two
pounds of peaches for a minute, take off and drop them immediately in
cold water. Drain and skin immediately, cut in two and remove the stone.
Crack two-thirds of the stones and throw the kernels in boiling water;
leave them in till the skin comes off easily; skin them well and cut
them in small pieces, lengthwise. Lay the peaches in a pan, with about a
pound and a half of sugar, set on the fire, boil about twenty minutes,
stirring the while with a wooden spoon; a few minutes before taking from
the fire, put also the kernels in the pan; then turn in pots or jars as
soon as off the fire. Cover well when cold, and keep in a dry and cool
(but not cold) closet.

_Of Plums._--Proceed as for the above.

_Of Pears and Quinces._--Quarter, peel, and core the fruit, put it in a
pan, and proceed for the rest as directed for peaches, except that you
use sweet almonds instead of kernels.

_Of Blackberries, Cherries, Currants, Raspberries, and other like
Berries._--Wash the fruit in cold water, drain, dry, and mash it through
a sieve placed over a saucepan; when the juice and pulp are in the pan
add the same weight of loaf-sugar as that of juice, which is easily
ascertained by weighing the pan first; set on the fire, skim it
carefully; it takes about half an hour to cook; then put in pots and let
cool; cut a piece of white paper the size of the inside of the pot, dip
it in brandy, put it over the fruit, cover the pots, and place them in a
dry and cool closet.

_Of Grapes._--Select well-ripened grapes and pick the berries. Put them
in a thick towel, and press the juice out, which you put in a copper or
brass saucepan, set on a good fire, and boil till about half reduced.
Skim off the scum, and stir now and then while it is on the fire. Then
add about half a pound of loaf-sugar to a pound of juice, boil again
fifteen or twenty minutes, take off, put in pots or jars, cover or cork
well when cold, and put away in a dark and cool closet.

_Candied or Comfited Fruit._--The best state of the fruit to be candied
is just when commencing to ripen or a little before. It must be picked
in dry weather, and be sound; the least stain is enough to spoil it soon
after it is preserved.

_Peaches._--Make a cut on the side of the fruit and remove the stone
without bruising it; then skin it carefully and drop it in a pan of cold
water. When they are all in, set on the fire, boil gently till they
float. There must be much more water than is necessary to cover them, in
order to see easily when they come to the surface. Then take them off
carefully, with a skimmer, and drop them in cold water and drain. When
drained, put them in a pan, cover them with syrup of sugar after it is
skimmed and clarified. (_See_ Syrup of Sugar.) The syrup must be boiling
when turned over the fruit. Set on the fire, give one boil only, and
turn the whole into a bowl, which you cover with paper, and leave thus
twelve or fifteen hours. After that time, drain, put the syrup on the
fire, the peaches in the bowl, and at the first boiling of the syrup,
turn it over the fruit, cover the bowl with paper, and leave about as
long, that is, twelve or fifteen hours.

Repeat the same process three times more, in all five times. The last
time the syrup must be at the first state as described for syrup of
sugar. Inexperienced persons will do well to try at first with a few
fruits, and go through the whole process, after which it will be
comparatively easy.

Every one is awkward in doing a thing for the first time, and does not
do it well, however easy or simple it may be. That is the reason why
societies of farmers make better preserves than other people; they
teach one another; and besides, no one is allowed to touch the fruit
before having seen it done several times.

Candied fruit, as well as preserves, get spoiled by fermentation, if not
cooked enough; by moisture, if kept in a damp place; or by heat, if kept
in a warm place.

When the last process has been gone through, leave the fruit in the bowl
about twenty-four hours; then put it in jars, cover air-tight, and put
away in a dry and cool closet. It may also be drained, dried on a riddle
in a warm place, and kept in boxes. A wooden riddle or screen is better
than a metal one. They may also be put in decanters, covered with brandy
or other liquor, and corked well. When preserved in brandy, it is not
necessary to remove the stone; they may be covered with half syrup and
half brandy.

_Plums._--Pick them just before commencing to ripen, and cut the stem
half way. When clean, but neither stoned nor skinned, prick them around
the stem with a fork, drop them in cold water, set on the fire, add a
gill of vinegar to three quarts of water, and take from the fire as soon
as they float. Drain, put them in a bowl, pour boiling syrup of sugar
over them, and proceed as directed for peaches, that is, cover and pour
the syrup on them five times in all. They are kept like peaches also,
either in jars, dried, or in brandy.

_Pears._--After being peeled and the stem cut off half way, they may be
preserved whole or in quarters. In peeling them, they must be dropped in
cold water with a little lemon-juice to keep them white. They are picked
just before commencing to ripen. When ready, put cold water and the
juice of a lemon to every two quarts in a deep pan, and drop the pears
in, set on the fire and boil gently till well done; take off, drain and
drop in cold water, which you change two or three times and without
stopping; then drain again, place them in a large bowl, and then proceed
as for peaches. They are kept like peaches also.

_Apples._--Proceed as for pears, except that apples are cooked much
quicker.

_Pine-Apples._--Peel, slice, and drop the fruit in cold water; add a
little sugar, set on the fire and boil gently till done, when drain and
drop in cold water and drain again. Put them in a bowl, and proceed as
for peaches for the rest, with the exception that they are kept in jars
only, and not dried or put in brandy.

_Chestnuts._--Skin the chestnuts and put them in cold water on the fire,
and take off when tender; then remove the under skin or white envelope
or pith. Place them in a bowl, and proceed as for peaches for the rest.

_Oranges._--Drop oranges in boiling water and take off when the rind is
tender, and when a darning-needle can be run through it easily. Drain
and drop them in cold water. After two or three hours drain, cut in
slices, and put them in a bowl; then proceed as for peaches, except that
they are kept in jars only.

_Quinces._--Peel, quarter, and core quinces just before they commence
ripening, drop in boiling water; drain them when done, and drop them
immediately in cold water. As soon as cold, take them off, drain and put
them in a bowl. For the rest, proceed as for peaches, with the exception
that they are only kept in jars, but neither dried nor put in brandy.

To Preserve in Brandy.--Besides the dried fruits above described,
several may be preserved in brandy, without being cooked and soaked in
syrup of sugar.

_Cherries._--Pick them when fully ripe, see that they are clean, and put
them in decanters with cloves, pieces of cinnamon, and entirely covered
with brandy; cover well, but do not cork, and leave thus two weeks, at
the end of which, place a colander over a vessel and empty the decanters
into it; pass the liquor through a jelly-bag, mix it with some syrup of
sugar at the second degree, turn over the fruit which you cover with it,
and cork the decanters well when perfectly cold. Keep in a dark, cool,
and dry place.

Do the same with strawberries and other like fruit.

_Fruit Jellies--With Apples or Quinces._--Peel, core, and cut in small
pieces two quarts of good apples or quinces, lay them in a stewpan with
a clove well pounded, and the juice of half a lemon; cover with water,
set on a moderate fire, and boil slowly till well cooked. Turn into a
jelly-bag, or a thick towel under which you place a vessel to receive
the juice, and when it is all out, put it in a stewpan with
three-quarters of a pound of sugar to every pound of juice; boil to a
jelly.

As soon as done put it in pots or jars, let cool, cut a piece of white
paper the size of the inside of the pot, dip it in brandy, put it over
the jelly, cover the pot well, and place in a dry, cool closet, but not
too cold. What remains in the bag may be used to make a _compote_. Watch
the process carefully, skimmer in hand, to skim off the scum, and stir
now and then, lest it should burn.

_With Apricots, Peaches, Plums, etc._--After having taken the stones
out, cut them in four pieces, and proceed as for apple-jelly above in
every other particular.

_With Blackberries, Currants, Grapes, Raspberries, or other like
Berries._--Put the well-ripened berries in a coarse towel and squeeze
all the juice out of them, which you put into a stewpan with as many
pounds of loaf-sugar as there are of juice, and finish as directed for
apple-jelly. A little rum or essence of rose, or any other, according to
taste, may be added just before taking from the fire.

_Punch._--Put a saltspoonful of black tea in a crockery pot, with one
clove, a little cinnamon, and the rind of a lemon cut in pieces; pour on
the whole half a pint of boiling water; let it remain thus five minutes,
and strain. Put a bottle of rum or brandy in a crockery vessel, with
twelve ounces of loaf-sugar, set the rum or brandy on fire, and let burn
till it stops. Then mix tea and rum together, and it is ready for use.
It is drunk cold or warm, according to taste. When wanted warm, if made
previously, set it on a moderate fire, in a tin or crockery kettle.

It keeps very well if carefully bottled and corked when cold.

Another way to make it is to mix the rum or brandy with the tea without
burning it. It is warmed, used, and kept like the above. The quantity of
water may be reduced or augmented, according to taste, and so also the
sugar.

_Another._--Grate the rind of a lemon and of two oranges on a piece of
sugar, the yellow part only, and put it in a bowl with cold water to
dissolve it; then add two gills of pine-apple syrup, essence of vanilla,
a pint of claret wine, a pint of Catawba, Sauterne, or Rhine wine, a
pint of Champagne, and a gill of brandy; sweeten to taste; strain, put
on ice for some time, and serve.

_Another._--Put a pound of sugar in a bowl with a gill of water to
dissolve it; then add the juice of three oranges, a little rind grated,
a bottle of Champagne and one of Catawba or Sauterne wine; strain, place
on ice for some time, and serve cold.

_Roman Punch._--Make iced lemon with one quart of juice, same of syrup
as directed, then mix with it the juice of four oranges, some lemon and
orange rind grated, and about three gills of rum (or according to
taste); also, if liked, the preparation used for iced fruit. Then put
the mixture in the freezer, stir while freezing, and serve. It must not
be frozen hard, as it is better when served rather liquid and frothy. It
may be made with any other liquor, if preferred.

Punch is served either after the _entrees_ or after the _releves_ of
fish, according to taste.




  PASTRY.


Of all the branches of the science and art of cooking, pastry, if not
the most difficult, requires the greatest care. An inferior piece of
meat makes an inferior dish, but still it can be eaten without danger:
but inferior pastry can hardly be eaten; or, if eaten, it is
indigestible. We will recommend our readers to be very careful about
proportions; it would not make a great difference for some kinds, but
for others, putting too much or too little of one or more things would
certainly result in failure. It is very important to have good
materials. New flour is very inferior for pastry; it must have been
ground for at least three months. Always keep it in bags, and in a dry
and well-ventilated place. Sift before using it. Use fresh eggs, good
butter, and good pulverized sugar.

The most important of all is the oven, for, supposing that you have used
good materials, have mixed them well, if not properly baked, every thing
is lost, materials and labor. Supposing that you have a good oven, there
is still a difficulty--and if the last, not the least--the degree of
heat. Some require a quick oven, as puff-paste, _choux_, etc.; others a
warm one, and others a slow oven, as _meringues_ biscuits, etc. By
putting the hand in the oven you can tell if it is properly heated, but
it requires experience, and even practitioners are often mistaken;
therefore, the easiest way is to have a thermometer in the oven. It may
be placed in the oven of every stove or range; it is only necessary to
bore a hole on the top of the range or stove, reaching the oven, and
have a thermometer with the bulb inclosed in a brass sheath, perforated,
long enough to reach the oven, and of the size of the hole bored--the
glass tube being above the top of the range.

_Pastes._--There are several kinds of paste. Puff-paste is the most
important; it can be made very rich, rich, and less so; and several
hundred different cakes can be made with it. Small cakes are called
_petits fours_.

The next in importance is the _pate-a-choux_; then the paste for
meat-pies, sometimes called _pate brisee_.

Puff-paste requires care, but is easily made; _pate-a-choux_ must be
well worked.

_Puff-paste._--To make good puff-paste, good flour and butter, free from
salt or sour milk, are indispensable. It must be made in a cool place.
Take half a pound of good butter and knead it well in a bowl of cold
water; if fresh and not salt, the kneading will take the sour milk out
of it; if salty, it will remove the salt, then put it in another bowl of
cold water and leave it till it is perfectly firm, and then use. When
the butter is ready, put half a pound of flour on the paste-board or
marble, make a hole in it, in which you put a pinch of salt, and cold
water enough to make a rather stiff dough. It requires about half a pint
of water, knead well, make a kind of ball with the dough, and put it on
a corner of your marble or paste-board. Take the butter from the water
and knead it on the board, to press all the water out of it. Give it the
shape of a large sausage; dredge the board slightly with flour, roll the
butter over only once, as it must take very little of it, dredge both
ends of the piece of butter with flour also, then by putting one end on
the board and pressing on the other end with your hands, you will
flatten it of a rather round shape, and till of about half an inch in
thickness. Put it thus on the corner of the board also. Immediately
after having prepared the butter, take the dough and roll it down, of a
round form also, and till large enough to envelop the butter in it
easily. Remember that during the whole operation of folding and rolling
the paste down, you must dust the marble or paste-board with flour, very
slightly and often; do the same on the top of the paste. It is done in
order to prevent the paste from adhering to the board or to the
rolling-pin. It must be dusted slightly, so that the paste cannot absorb
much of it, as it would make it tough. Have a slab of marble or slate;
it is much easier than wood, and cooler.

When the dough is spread, place the butter right on the middle of it.
Turn one side of the dough over the butter, covering it a little more
than half way; do the game with the opposite side, the dough lapping
over that of the first side turned; do the same with the side toward
you, and also with the side opposite. Dough stretching easily when
pulled, and contracting easily when let loose after having pulled it,
you have now still four corners of the dough to bring over the butter
and in the same way as above, and by doing which, you give to the whole
a somewhat round form, and also have the butter perfectly enveloped in
the dough. Place the rolling-pin on the middle of the paste,
horizontally, and press gently on it so as to make a furrow; do the same
from place to place, on the whole surface, making furrows about an inch
apart. Repeat the process again, this time placing the rolling-pin right
on the top of each elevated line; and again, repeat it a third time,
also placing the pin on each elevated line. Now do exactly the same
contrariwise. Then, roll the paste down, gently, evenly, to a thickness
of about one fourth of an inch, and of a rectangular shape. Fold it in
three by turning over one-third of its length toward the other end, and
thus covering another third of it; fold or turn over the remaining
third, so as to cover the first third turned over. Roll it down again of
about the same thickness as above, but without making furrows in it;
give it also the same rectangular shape, taking care to make the length
of what was the width, _i. e._ extending it the longer way in an
opposite direction to that of the first time, so that the ends will be
what the sides were. Fold in three as before, put it on a plate and set
in a refrigerator for from ten to twenty minutes. Take hold of it again,
roll down as above, fold in the same way also, and put away for ten
minutes. You roll down and fold from four to six times, not counting the
time you envelop the butter in the dough. In cold weather, and when the
butter is firm, fold and roll only four times; but in rather warm
weather, fold and roll six times. If it is too warm, it is of no use to
try with butter.

Puff-paste may be made without stopping; that is, without putting it
away in a cool place for some time; but it is better to let it rest; it
is lighter and rises better. When finished, it can be used immediately;
but it is better also to put it in a plate or dish, cover it with a
towel, and put it in a refrigerator for from twelve to twenty-four
hours. Although it must be kept in a cool place, do not put it near
enough to the ice to freeze. It may be kept thus for two or three days.

_Puff-paste with Beef-Suet_.--Take half a pound of fresh beef suet, the
nearest the kidney the best; break it in small pieces with the hands,
at the same time removing the thin skin and fibres as much as possible;
put it in a bowl of cold water and knead well till it is rather soft;
take it off, mash and bruise it well on the paste-board with a
rolling-pin; knead it again like butter; roll it in flour like butter
also, and proceed as above for the rest, and with the same proportion,
weight for weight of flour and beef-suet, but it requires more salt.
Beef-suet being more firm than butter, puff-paste can be made with it
during summer, but it must be eaten immediately, being very inferior
after a while.

The proportion of butter and flour may be varied. Weight for weight
makes the real puff-paste, and very rich. If less butter is used it will
not rise as much, but is excellent nevertheless, and is more handy to
make different cakes, such as short-cakes with fruit. Therefore
puff-paste may be made with the following proportions: to one pound of
flour, use fourteen, twelve, ten, eight, or even four ounces of butter
or suet. Another way is to mix one or two eggs in the flour, water, and
salt before rolling it down. When eggs are used, it requires less water.
Envelop the butter in it in the same way.

_Allumettes._--Cut strips of puff-paste of any length, about three
inches wide and about one-fifth of an inch in thickness; mix well
together, and for about three or four minutes, one ounce of sugar and
about half the white of an egg; spread this mixture over the strips of
paste, so as to have a rather thin coat of it; then cut the paste
across, so as to make small strips about one inch broad and three inches
long. Bake in an oven at about 400 deg. Fahr.

_Feuillettes._--Roll puff-paste down to a thickness of from one-eighth
to one-half of an inch in thickness; cut it in pieces of any size and
shape, according to fancy with a knife or with a paste-cutter; glaze the
top only with egg, and bake in an oven at about 450 deg. Fahr.

_Feuillettes a la Conde._--Roll and cut the paste exactly as for the
above; then, instead of baking it, fry it in hot fat (_see_ Frying);
turn into a colander when fried, dust with sugar, and serve as warm as
possible.

_Pommees._--Line the bottom of a bakepan with puff-paste, about
one-eighth of an inch in thickness; spread stewed apples over it of a
thickness of one-quarter of an inch; cover these with another thickness
of puff-paste; prick the cover all over with the point of a knife, and
bake in an oven at about 400 deg. Fahr. When baked, cut it in square
pieces, dust with sugar, and serve hot or cold, according to taste.

_Porte-manteaux._--Cut strips of puff-paste of any length, about three
inches broad, and one-eighth of an inch in thickness; spread on the
middle of the strips, and lengthwise, some frangipane, or stewed apples,
or any kind of sweetmeats, of the size of the finger. Then turn one side
of the paste over the frangipane or sweetmeats, glaze the border with
egg (we mean by "the border," about half an inch in width, measuring
from the edge); then turn the other side over it so that the glazing
will cause the two pastes to stick together. Thus it will be only a
little over an inch broad and about half an inch thick. Cut the strips
across in small pieces about two inches long, glaze the top with egg,
and then bake in an oven at 400 deg. Fahr.

_Tartelettes._--Roll some puff-paste down to a thickness of about
one-sixteenth of an inch; cut it, with a paste-cutter, of the size of
small tin moulds, and place the pieces in the moulds; put about a
teaspoonful of frangipane in each; place two narrow strips of paste
across each, which strips you cut with a truckle; bake in an oven at
about 380 deg. Fahr.

_Tartelettes (sweet)._--Proceed as for the above in every particular,
except that you use any kind of sweetmeats or jelly instead of
frangipane.

_Cake Pithiviers._--Roll some puff-paste down to a thickness of about
one-eighth of an inch; cut it round and place on a baking-pan; if the
pan be square or rectangular, cut a round piece that will go in easily;
cut a strip of paste about one inch broad, glaze with egg the border of
the paste in the pan, place the strip all around, and then glaze it
also. Fill the middle with the following mixture: pound four ounces of
sweet almonds and mix them well with half a pound of sugar, two ounces
of butter, four yolks of eggs, essence to flavor, and four macaroons
chopped. Cut another piece of puff-paste round, and of the same size as
the other; dust it slightly with flour, fold it gently in four; the
piece then will have two straight sides and a circular one. With a sharp
knife make three cuts in each of the two straight sides through the four
thicknesses of the paste, and about half an inch in length. Make another
cut through the paste also, representing half of the figure 8, right in
the middle of the piece of paste, commencing half an inch from the
border of the circular side and in the middle of it, and going toward
the point, so that when the paste is open there are sixteen cuts in it.
Place the paste still folded on the paste and mixture in the pan, the
circular side on the border and the point right in the middle; open it
gently, and the whole will be covered. Glaze with egg, and put in an
oven at from 430 to 460 deg. Fahr. The same cake may be filled with a
frangipane, and prepared as the above for the rest.

_Rissoles (also called Fourres)._--Cut round pieces of puff-paste about
three inches in diameter; wet the edge with water, put a teaspoonful of
compote or any kind of sweetmeat on one side of it, then fold the paste
in two, so as to cover the sweetmeat; pinch the paste around to cause it
to adhere, in order to envelop the sweetmeat; you have then a cake of a
semicircular shape. Glaze with egg, bake in a quick oven, dust with
sugar, and serve.

_Galette du Gymnase._--Make puff-paste with half a pound of butter to a
pound of flour, and when done as directed, knead it. Then roll it down
to the thickness of about one-fourth of an inch, cut it in strips of any
length and about an inch and a half wide, glaze with egg, bake in a
quick oven, about 420 deg. Fahr. The two ends of the strips may be
brought together and joined, forming a crown. The same _galette_ is made
with trimmings of puff-paste, kneaded and rolled as above.

_Fanchonnettes._--These are made with the same puff-paste as the
_galette_ above; then cut it in round pieces, place them on small
moulds, fill them with any kind of sweetmeats and frangipane, with
almonds, half of each; bake, dust with sugar, and serve. Instead of
frangipane, spread raisins over the sweetmeats, or almonds, peanuts,
hazel-nuts, etc., all cut in small strips, lengthwise; you make then an
infinite number of different small cakes.

_Fans._--Make some puff-paste with equal weight of flour and butter,
fold and roll it down six times, and put in a cold place. Leave it of a
thickness of about one-quarter of an inch; cut it with a sharp knife in
pieces of a rectangular shape, about four inches long and two broad,
which cut again in two, across and from one corner to the other, so that
you make two pieces of a right-angled triangle shape. Place the pieces
on their sides in a bake-pan, on their sides, far apart, and bake in a
very quick oven. When done, dust with sugar, and serve.

_Vol-au-vent_ and _bouchees_ for the day's use are baked early in the
morning. They are warmed in a slow oven just before filling them.

_Vol-au-vent._--A _vol-au-vent_ is made with puff-paste and filled with
oysters, meat, etc., when baked; that is, when the cake is baked and
emptied, it is warmed in the oven, filled, and served warm. It is made
of an oval or round shape. When made small it is generally of a round
shape, but when made rather large it is generally of an oval shape. When
the puff-paste is ready to be used, roll down to any thickness from
one-quarter to three-quarters of an inch; cut it with a sharp-pointed
knife of the size and shape you wish, then with the same knife cut what
is called the cover, _i. e._, make a cut all around, about half an inch
from the edge or border, and about one-third through the paste, leaving
two-thirds of the thickness of the paste uncut. This operation is called
marking out the cover. Glaze the top of the paste with egg, and bake it
in a very quick oven, about 500 deg. Fahr. In glazing, be careful not to
glaze the sides or allow any egg to run on the sides; it would prevent
the paste from rising. Some drawings may be made on the cover with the
back of a knife, according to fancy: leaves, for instance, are very
easily imitated; it is only necessary to run the knife on the paste,
without cutting it. When in the oven, do not look at it for at least
seven or eight minutes, for in opening the door of the oven it might
cause the paste to fall and even after that time open and shut the door
quickly; take off when properly baked. When the oven is hot enough it
takes about twelve minutes, and even less time when the _vol-au-vent_ is
small. Take from the oven when baked, and immediately run the point of
the knife all around and in the same place as you did before being
baked, which place is well marked. Thus you cut off the cover and remove
it, then remove also all the unbaked paste that is inside of the
_vol-au-vent_, so that you have left what may be called a shell. Keep it
then till the oysters or meat are ready to put in it. About five minutes
before the filling is ready, put the shell or baked paste in a slow oven
to warm it, turn the filling into it, enough to fill it entirely; place
the cover on the top, and serve warm. The unbaked paste removed from the
inside is baked, and makes an excellent cake, though not a sightly one.

_Another._--Cut a piece of puff-paste the same as for the above one,
that is, either round or oval, and of the size you wish. Instead of
marking a cover, glaze the border with egg. It is understood here by
"the border," a space about three-quarters of an inch broad and all
around it, the space being measured from the edge toward the centre.
Then cut a strip of puff-paste about three-quarters of an inch broad,
long enough to cover the place or space glazed, which strip you put all
around the first paste, and you then have a border. The place between
the two pastes being glazed, they will adhere in baking. Then also glaze
the upper side of the border carefully with egg. With a knife or fork,
prick the paste, inside of the border only, in ten, fifteen, or twenty
places, according to the size of the _vol-au-vent_, and in order to
prevent that part from rising as much as it would if not pricked. Bake
in the same oven as the above--a very quick one.

A _vol-au-vent_ thus made is deeper than the first one, having two
thicknesses of paste. Generally there is little or no paste (unbaked) to
remove; having pricked the centre, it prevents it from rising and bakes
it evenly, but if there is any, remove it. A cover may be made by
cutting a piece of puff-paste of the size of the _vol-au-vent_ and
baking it separately. It may be decorated with the back of the knife as
the above one, and made convex on the top by baking it on a piece of
tin. It is warmed, filled, and served the same as the above.

A _vol-au-vent_ is filled with the following:

_With Oysters._--The quantity is according to the size of the
_vol-au-vent_. Blanch one quart of oysters. Put two ounces of butter in
a saucepan, set it on the fire, and when melted add a tablespoonful of
flour; stir, and when turning rather yellow add also about a pint of
milk, and the liquor from the oysters; stir, and as soon as it turns
rather thick put the oysters in, taking care to have them free from
pieces of the shell. Give one boil, add salt to taste, two yolks of
eggs, stir again, turn into the warm paste, place the cover on, and
serve warm.

_With Lobster._--Prepare the lobster as for _bouchees_, fill the shell
with it, and serve warm.

_With Cod-fish._--Prepare fresh cod-fish _a la Bechamel_, fill the
_vol-au-vent_ or shell with it, and serve warm.

_With Turbot._--Proceed as for cod-fish in every particular.

_With Eels._--Fill the _vol-au-vent_ with eels, oyster sauce, or in
_poulette_, and serve warm.

_With Chicken._--Fill with a chicken or part of a chicken in _fricassee_
or _saute_.

_With Livers and Combs of Chicken._--Prepare combs and livers of chicken
in _fricassee_, the same as a chicken, fill the _vol-au-vent_ with them.
Serve hot.

_With Sweetbreads._--Cook the sweetbreads as directed, and fill the
_vol-au-vent_ with them. Serve warm.

_With Veal._--Fill the _vol-au-vent_ with veal in _blanquette_, in
_ragout_, or in _bourgeoise_, and serve. It is generally filled with
what has been left the day previous, as it requires very little for a
_vol-au-vent_.

_With Brains._--It may be filled with brains of calf, pig, sheep, or
veal; prepared in _poulette_, or stewed.

_With Rabbit._--Fill it with part of a rabbit _saute_.

It may also be filled with any other _meat_ or _fish_, according to
taste, and being cooked previously.

_With Fruits._--Fill the _vol-au-vent_ with any kind of stewed fruit,
jelly, sweetmeats, etc. It may be only filled, or the fruit may be
dressed in pyramid inside of it.

_Bouchees._--_Bouchees_, or _petites bouchees_, as they are sometimes
called, are small, round _vol-au-vent_, served warm. They are also
called _bouchees de dames_ and _petites bouchees_. Roll puff-paste down
to a thickness of about one-quarter of an inch, cut it with a
paste-cutter of any size, mark the cover, and bake in an oven at about
450 deg. Fahr. A good size is about three inches in diameter. When cut, take
another paste-cutter about two inches in diameter, place it on the piece
of paste; press on it just enough to mark the place where it was, but
not enough to cut the paste, remove it and then the cover is marked;
that is, you have a circle on the top of the paste, half an inch from
the edge all around. Glaze with egg and bake. Make one for each person.
Immediately on taking them from the oven, cut off the cover with a
sharp-pointed knife. That is easily done; it is only necessary to follow
the mark made with the paste-cutter, which is just as visible as before
baking. Remove the cover and then carefully take out some unbaked paste
inside of the _bouchee_, fill with lobster prepared as directed below,
put the cover on, and serve as warm as possible.

_The Filling._--Cut some flesh of boiled lobster in dice. Put two ounces
of butter in a saucepan and set it on the fire; when melted, add a
tablespoonful of flour, stir for about one minute, and add also broth
(the quantity must be according to the number of _bouchees_, but we will
give here the quantity necessary for five or six _bouchees_), about
three gills, also salt, pepper, then the cut lobster; stir now and then
for five or six minutes, and use.

_Of Oysters._--Prepare, fill and serve exactly as the above, except that
you fill with oysters prepared as for _vol-au-vent_, instead of filling
with lobster.

_Of Cod-fish._--Fill the _bouchees_ with cod-fish, prepared _a la
Bechamel_, and serve warm.

_Of Eels._--Have some eels prepared either in _poulette_ or
oyster-sauce, fill the _bouchees_, and serve warm.

_Of Turbot._--It is filled with turbot _a la creme_ or _a la Bechamel_.

It may also be filled with any kind of fish, prepared _a la Bechamel_,
_a la creme_, in white sauce, oyster-sauce, etc.

_Of Truffles._--Cut the white flesh of a chicken in dice, prepare it as
a chicken _saute_, using truffles but no mushrooms, fill the _bouchees_
with it and serve warm.

_Of Puree of Chicken, or Bouchees de Dames._--It is filled with some
_puree_ of chicken, and served as warm as possible.

Do the same with a _puree_ of game.

_Of Bobolink._--Prepare and clean twelve bobolinks as directed for
birds, put a teaspoonful of truffles, cut in small dice, in each bird,
for stuffing; sew the incision, and bake or roast the birds. Put each
bird in a _bouchee_, and serve warm. A more delicate dish cannot be
made.

The same may be done with any kind of _small bird_.

_Bouchees_ are generally served on a napkin and on a dish, in pyramid.

_Pate a choux._--Weigh four ounces of flour, to which add half a
teaspoonful of sugar. Put two gills of cold water in a tin saucepan with
two ounces of butter, and set it on the fire, stir a little with a
wooden spoon to melt the butter before the water boils. At the first
boiling of the water, throw into it the four ounces of flour and stir
very fast with the spoon, holding the pan fast with the left hand. As
soon as the whole is thoroughly mixed, take from the fire, but continue
stirring for about fifteen or twenty seconds. It takes hardly half a
minute from the time the flour is dropped in the pan to that when taken
from the fire. The quicker it is done, the better. When properly done,
nothing at all sticks to the pan, and by touching it with the finger it
feels as soft as velvet, and does not adhere to it at all. Let it stand
two or three minutes, then mix well with it, by means of a spoon, one
egg; then another, and so on; in all four. It takes some time and work
to mix the eggs, especially to mix the first one, the paste being rather
stiff. They are added one at a time, in order to mix them better. If the
eggs are small, add half of one or one more. To use only half a one, it
is necessary to beat it first. Let the paste stand half an hour, stir
again a little, and use. If it is left standing for some time and is
found rather dry, add a little egg, which mix, and then use.

_Beignets Souffles_--(_also called Pets de Nonne_).--Make some _pate a
choux_; take a small tablespoonful of it, holding the spoon with the
left hand, and with the forefinger of the right cause the paste to fall
in hot fat on the fire (_see_ Frying), turn over and over again till
fried, then turn into a colander, dust with sugar, and serve hot. In
frying, the paste will swell four or five times its size, and by
dropping it carefully and as nearly of a round shape as possible, the
cakes will be nearly round when done.

_Choux or Cream Cakes._--Make some _pate a choux_: have a buttered
bakepan, and drop the paste upon it in the same way as you drop the
_beignets_ above; glaze with egg, and bake in an oven at about 380 deg.
Fahr. When baked and cold, make a cut on one side, about two-thirds
through, the cut to be horizontal, a little above the middle, then, by
raising the top a little, fill the cake, which is hollow, with one of
the following creams: _whipped_, _Chantilly_, _cuite_, _frangipane_, or
_legere_; dust with sugar, and serve.

_The same, with Almonds._--Blanch sweet almonds and cut them in small
strips, lengthwise; then, when the choux are in the bakepan and glazed
with egg, spread the almonds all over, bake, fill, and serve as the
above.

_Saint Honore._--Make some _pate a choux_. Then put four tablespoonfuls
of flour on the paste-board with two of sugar, one egg, one ounce of
butter, salt, and a pinch of cinnamon; mix and knead the whole well;
roll the paste down to a thickness of about one quarter of an inch and
place it in a bakepan. Put a dessert-plate upside down on the paste, and
cut it all around the plate with a knife; remove what is cut off and
also the plate. Spread some _pate a choux_, about a teaspoonful, all
over the paste left in the bakepan, about one-sixteenth of an inch in
thickness; put some of it also in the pastry-bag, and by squeezing it
out, make a border with it about the size of the finger; prick the
middle of the paste in about a dozen places with a fork and inside of
the border; glaze the border with egg, and then bake in an oven at about
400 deg. Fahr. While the above is baking, make very small _choux_ (about the
size of a macaroon), and bake them also. When both are baked, and while
they are cooking, make some _creme legere_, fill the inside of the cake
with it, so as to imitate a sugar-loaf or mound, about four inches in
height, smooth it or scallop it with a knife. Put two tablespoonfuls of
sugar and two of water in a saucepan, set it on the fire, toss the pan
occasionally to boil evenly, and till it becomes like syrup. Do not stir
too much, else it will turn white and somewhat like molasses-candy. It
is reduced enough when, by dipping (not stirring) a little stick in it
and dipping it again immediately in cold water, the syrup-like liquor
that has adhered to it breaks easily and is very transparent. It must be
as transparent as glass. As soon as reduced thus, take from the fire and
use. Dip the top of each small _chou_ in it, holding the _chou_ with a
small knife stuck in it; place a piece of candy (generally, sugar-plums
of various colors are used) on the top of each _chou_; place them apart
and around the _creme legere_, and upon the border of the cake, with one
a little larger than the others on the top of it; serve cold. This cake
is as good as it is sightly.

_Eclairs._--_Eclairs_ are also called _petits pains_ or _profiterolles
au chocolat_.

_Eclairs au Chocolat._--Make some _pate a choux_ as directed above, and
put it in the pastry-bag with tube No. 1 at the end of it. Force it out
of the bag into a baking-pan greased with butter. By closing and holding
up the larger end of the bag and by pressing it downward, it will come
out of the tube in a rope-like shape and of the size of the tube. Draw
the bag toward you while pressing, and stop when you have spread a
length of about four inches. Repeat this operation till the baking-pan
is full or till the paste is all out. Leave a space of about two inches
between each cake, as they swell in baking. Bake in an oven at about 370
degrees. When baked and cold, slit one side about half through, open
gently and fill each cake with the following cream, and then close it.
Cream: put in a block-tin saucepan three tablespoonfuls of sugar, two
of flour, four yolks of eggs, and mix well with a wooden spoon. Add a
pint of milk, little by little, and mixing the while; set on the fire,
stir continually till it becomes rather thick, and take off. Have one
ounce of chocolate melted on a slow fire in half a gill of milk, and mix
it with the rest, and use. Put one ounce of chocolate in a tin saucepan
with a teaspoonful of water, and set on a slow fire; when melted, mix
with it two tablespoonfuls of sugar, stir for a while; that is, till it
is just thick enough to spread it over the cakes, and not liquid enough
to run down the sides. A thickness of about one-sixteenth of an inch is
sufficient. The cakes may either be dipped in the chocolate or the
chocolate may be spread over them with a knife. Serve cold.

_Eclairs au Cafe._--It is made exactly like the above, except that you
mix with the cream three tablespoonfuls of strong coffee, instead of
chocolate and milk.

_Eclairs au The._--It is made like the preceding one, with the exception
that strong tea is used instead of strong coffee.

_Eclairs a la Vanille._--Proceed as for the above, but mix a teaspoonful
of essence of vanilla in the cream instead of tea.

_Eclairs a l'Essence._--The meaning of _eclairs a l'essence_ is, that a
few drops of any kind of essence are mixed with the cream instead of
chocolate and milk, and prepared and served like the others.

_Eclairs aux Fraises._--Instead of filling the cakes with cream, fill
them with strawberry-jelly, and for the rest proceed as for _eclairs au
chocolat_.

_Eclairs aux Groseilles._--Made like the above, but filled with
currant-jelly.

Do the same with _apple_, _blackberry_, _cherry_, _grape_, _peach_,
_pear_, _plum_, _quince_, _raspberry jelly_, etc.

_Petits Pains a la Reine._--_Eclairs_ are so called when filled with
marmalade of peaches in which sweet almonds chopped fine have been mixed
previously.

_Petits Pains a la Rose._--Like the above, and by adding a few drops of
essence of roses to the marmalade.

_Petits Pains a l'Essence._--Like the above, with any kind of essence:
_pink_, _violet_, _geranium_, etc.

_Biscuits in Boxes._--Make some square boxes with sheets of white paper;
fill them about two-thirds full with the same mixture as for lady's
fingers, dust with sugar, and bake in a slow oven; serve cold.

_With Almonds._--Mix well together with a wooden spoon four yolks of
eggs with four ounces of sugar (pulverized), add three ounces of flour
and mix well again. Beat the four whites to a stiff froth, and then have
somebody to turn the mixture into them while you finish beating, and
then mix the whole gently but well. It must not be stirred too much.
Have two ounces of bitter almonds well pounded, with a teaspoonful of
sugar, and mix them with the rest. Butter small moulds, turn the mixture
into them, filling about two-thirds full, glaze with egg, dust with
sugar, and bake in an oven at about 300 degrees Fahr.; serve cold.

_With Chocolate._--Make some biscuits like the above, omitting the
almonds, and flavoring them with a few drops of essence of vanilla. When
cold, glaze them with chocolate, the same as described for _eclairs_,
and serve.

_With Essence._--Make biscuits with almonds or without, as the above
ones, and flavor them with any kind of essence, or with orange and lemon
rind grated.

_Glazed._--When the biscuits are baked, glaze them with icing, and
serve cold. These are sometimes called _biscuits a la royale_.

_Of Rheims._--Mix well in a bowl six yolks of eggs with six ounces of
sugar, with a wooden spoon. Add and mix with the above five ounces of
flour and lemon-rind grated; beat four whites of eggs to a stiff froth,
and mix them also with the rest. Butter small moulds, turn the mixture
into them, and bake in a slow oven, about 300 degrees Fahr. These are
often made of the shape of lady's fingers. They are excellent eaten with
wine.

_With Filberts._--Put ten or twelve ounces of filberts or peanuts in a
mortar with a few drops of orange-flower water and about half the white
of an egg; when reduced to a paste, mix well with it four ounces of
sifted flour, eight ounces of fine, white sugar, the yolks of two eggs
well beaten, and the whites of four eggs whisked to a froth; when the
whole is properly mixed, put it into a well-buttered mould, which place
in a moderately-heated oven; watch it carefully, take out when cooked,
which is easily known by the color it assumes.

Biscuits with hazel-nuts, peach, or other kernels, may be made in the
same way; that is, using them instead of filberts.

_Lady's Fingers._--Mix well together with a wooden spoon four yolks of
eggs and four ounces of pulverized sugar, then add three ounces of flour
and mix well again. Beat four whites of eggs to a stiff froth; have
somebody to turn two tablespoonfuls of the mixture into the whites as
soon as beaten enough, and which you mix with the egg-beater, then turn
the rest or the mixture in, mixing gently with the wooden spoon. This
must be done rather quickly, to prevent the whole from turning liquid.
Put the mixture in the pastry-bag with tin tube No. 1 at the end of it,
squeeze it out in sticks about four inches long into a baking-pan
slightly buttered and dusted with flour, or on a piece of paper placed
in the bottom of the pan; then dust them with sugar, and bake in a
rather slow oven. They must not change in the oven, that is, they must
not spread or swell, showing that the oven is too hot or too slow, or
that the mixture has not been properly prepared. They must be like small
sticks, round on the upper side and flat underneath. They are sometimes
called _biscuits a la cuiller_. They are used to make a _Charlotte
Russe_, or eaten with wine.

Cakes.--_Almond._--Blanch, skin, and pound well one ounce of sweet
almonds and the same of bitter ones, which you mix with eight ounces of
pulverized sugar, six of flour, two eggs, a tablespoonful of brandy or
rum, and a pinch of sugar. When thoroughly mixed, add five yolks of
eggs, mix and stir for five minutes, then add also and mix half a pound
of melted butter. Turn the mixture in small moulds, well buttered, and
bake in a rather slow oven. Some almonds cut in small pieces may be
spread over just before baking; or, when baked, some icing may be spread
over. Serve cold. This is also called _Nantais cake_. Instead of
almonds, use filberts, hazel-nuts, currants, peanuts, or raisins.

_Fourre._--This is made with puff-paste and cream, or puff-paste and
different mixtures placed inside of it, such as _Pithiviers cake_ and
fruit-pies.

_Anchovy._--Knead four ounces of flour with two ounces of butter, a
little salt, and a little water. Clean four anchovies and put them in
vinegar for five minutes; then cut them in small pieces, put them in a
bowl, and cover them with sweet-oil; leave them thus ten minutes. Roll
the paste thin, then place a little more than half of it on a tart-dish,
raising it all around with the thumb and forefinger; cover the paste
with the anchovies, and these with the remainder of the paste, after
having cut it in square pieces; spread some of the oil in which were the
anchovies on it, bake in a warm oven, baste now and then with a little
of the oil, and serve warm.

_Apple._--Stew eight or ten apples and mash them through a sieve. Put
them in a saucepan with about two ounces of butter and eight of sugar,
set on the fire for five minutes, take off, let cool, and then mix with
it five or six eggs, one after another. Turn the mixture into a buttered
mould, which you place in a pan of boiling water, then boil slowly about
half an hour, turn over a dish, and serve warm or cold.

_Hard._--Put half a pound of flour on the paste-board and make a hole in
the middle; put into it three ounces of pulverized sugar, three ounces
of butter, two eggs, a pinch of cinnamon, a few drops of essence, and
knead the whole well, dust the board with flour, roll the paste down to
a thickness of about one-fourth of an inch, cut it in pieces with a
paste-cutter, of any shape; beat one egg with a teaspoonful of sugar and
glaze the pieces with it; with a piece of wood draw leaves or flowers on
each, and bake in an oven at about 360 degrees Fahr. They are eaten cold
at tea.

_Heavy or Gateau de Plomb._--Proceed as above with one pound of flour, a
pinch of salt, one ounce of sugar, four yolks of eggs, one pound of
butter, half a pint of cream; when rolled down as above, fold in two or
four, and roll down again; repeat the process four times. Then place it
in a bakepan and put in a hot oven. Serve cold at tea.

_Milanais._--Put one pound of flour on the paste-board and make a hole
in the middle, in which you put half a pound of butter, same of sugar,
two eggs, a pinch of salt, and a quarter of a gill of rum. Mix and knead
to a rather stiff dough with cold water. Spread it and roll it down to a
thickness of about one-eighth of an inch. Glaze it with egg, dust with
sugar and bake in a rather quick oven. When cold, cut it in two, spread
some _compote_ of peaches or of apricots on one half, put the other half
over it, cut in pieces according to fancy, and serve.

_Rum Cakes._--These are made with sponge cake cut with a paste-cutter,
some sweetmeats or jelly is placed on the middle, then it is dusted with
pulverized sugar, watered with rum, and then placed in the oven for
about two minutes. These cakes have several names, according to the kind
of sweetmeat used.

_Savarin._--Put one pound of flour on the paste-board and make a hole in
the middle; put into it four ounces of sugar, and make a hole again;
then put in the middle four eggs, twelve ounces of butter, one and a
half gills of milk; mix and knead the whole well; then mix again in the
whole four ounces of leaven prepared as directed; butter a mould, dust
it with sweet almonds chopped; put the mixture in it; put in a warm
place (about 78 degrees Fahr.) to rise, and bake in an oven at 430
degrees Fahr. It will take about two and a half hours to rise. The mould
must not be filled, else it will run over in rising.

_Sauce for Savarin._--Put four ounces of sugar and half a pint of cold
water in a block-tin saucepan, set it on the fire and boil till reduced
about one-third; then add from one-half to one gill of rum (according to
taste), give one more boil, and turn over the cake. Baste the cake with
the sauce till the whole is absorbed by it. Serve warm or cold.

_Sponge Cake._--Mix well together in a bowl six yolks of eggs with four
ounces of sugar; add four ounces of flour and mix again, add also a few
drops of essence, then whisk six whites of eggs to a stiff froth and mix
them again with the rest. Butter a mould, put the mixture into it, not
filling it more than two-thirds full, and bake in an oven at about 320
degrees. Sponge cake may be cut in pieces and used to make a _Charlotte
Russe_, instead of lady's fingers.

_Apple Dumplings._--Quarter, peel, and core the apples, and cut them in
pieces, then envelop them in puff-paste with beef-suet, boil till
thoroughly done, and serve warm with sugar, or with apple or wine sauce.
It may also be served with sauce for puddings.

_Buckwheat Cakes._--Make a kind of thin dough with tepid water, yeast,
buckwheat flour, and a little sugar and salt, let rise, and fry with
butter. Serve hot with sugar, or molasses, or butter.

_Corn Cakes._--Mix well in a bowl two eggs with two ounces of melted
butter, a pint of corn-meal, salt and sugar to taste. While mixing set
milk on the fire, and as soon as it rises, turn it into the mixture,
little by little, stirring and mixing the while, and till it makes a
kind of thick dough. Butter well a shallow bakepan, put the mixture into
it, and bake.

_Crullers._--Mix well together and work with a wooden spoon, in a bowl,
one egg with two ounces of melted butter and half a pound of pulverized
sugar; then add salt, cinnamon, nutmeg, a few drops of essence, and one
pound of flour, and mix again; add also milk, little by little, stirring
and mixing at the same time, enough to make a thick batter. Divide the
mixture in parts and fry in hot fat. (_See_ Frying.)

_Doughnuts._--Mix well together in a bowl four eggs with half a pound of
sugar, add two or three ounces of melted butter and mix again, then mix
with the whole, about one pound of flour and boiled milk enough to make
a rather thick dough, season and mix well with the whole, nutmeg,
cinnamon, and a few drops of essence. Cut in fancy pieces with a knife
or paste-cutter, and fry in hot fat. (_See_ Frying.) Dust with sugar,
and serve hot.

_Muffins._--Mix well together on the paste-board one pound of flour and
three eggs, then add and mix again milk enough to make a thin dough, a
little yeast and salt. Put away to rise; divide in parts and bake.

_Pound Cake._--Take a large bowl and put in it one pound of melted
butter and one pound of pulverized sugar, and mix the two thoroughly
together with a wooden spoon; then add and mix well also with them,
three eggs previously beaten with a saltspoonful of nutmeg and cinnamon,
half of each. When the eggs are mixed, add also half a pound of flour,
mix well again; then add six well-beaten eggs, and mix; then another
half pound of flour, a few drops of essence of rose, half a gill of
Sherry wine, a liquor-glass of brandy, four ounces of citron, and half a
pound of comfited fruit, chopped fine. Beat and mix as well as possible.
Butter a mould, dust it with fine bread-crumbs, turn the mixture into
it, and bake in a warm but not quick oven. It takes about two and a half
hours to bake. As soon as cold, serve it. It may be glazed with sugar,
or sugar and white of egg.

_Short Cake._--Cut puff-paste, made with a pound of flour and six or
eight ounces of butter, in square or round pieces, bake; when cold,
spread sweetened strawberries on, then cover with another cake, spread
strawberries again on it, etc. Strawberry-jelly may be used.

_Plum._--Mix well in a vessel a pound of sugar with a pound of butter,
and then again with eight eggs, one at a time, also half a pound of
raisins, half a pound of flour, a little rum, and a little yeast. Line a
mould with buttered paper, turn the mixture into it, not filling it more
than two-thirds full, place it in a warm but not quick oven for nearly
two hours, remove the mould, and serve hot or cold.

_Tea Cake._--Put half a pound of flour on the paste-board, and in the
middle of it a pinch of salt, half an ounce of sugar, two eggs, four
ounces of melted butter, and cold water enough to make a rather stiff
paste. Knead well, roll down to about a quarter of an inch in thickness;
cut it in pieces with a knife or paste-cutter; moisten the top with
water by means of a brush, dust with sugar, and bake in an oven at about
370 degrees Fahr. Serve cold.

_Viennois._--Make some biscuits in boxes, and when cold, cut off a
little piece on the top, in the centre, which place you fill with
peaches or apricots in _compote_; put two together; serve cold.

_With Jelly._--Proceed as above in every particular, using currant or
raspberry jelly instead of _compote_.


  MEAT-PIES.

_Pates de Viande._--Meat-pies are made in moulds without bottoms and
which open in two, or are made of two pieces joined and fastened
together with two pieces of wire. The size of the mould and that of the
pie are according to taste. A pie may be made and filled with a
reed-bird, or with a quail, or a partridge, or prairie-chicken, or with
a dozen of them. We will give the receipt for one prairie-chicken.

_Pate of Game._--Bone a prairie-chicken as directed for birds, and cut
it in about half a dozen slices or pieces. Grease the mould with butter
and put it in a baking-pan. Put one pound of flour on the paste-board
and make a hole in the middle; place in it six ounces of butter, one
egg, a pinch of salt, and about one gill and a half of cold water, and
knead the whole well. Roll it down to a thickness of about one-quarter
of an inch, and of a rectangular shape; fold in two, and roll down
again. Repeat this from six to twenty times; that is, till the paste is
soft. The last time roll it down to a thickness of one-third of an inch,
and give it as round a shape as possible. Dust the upper side slightly
with flour, fold in two in this way: turn the side farthest from you on
the other, so that the side of the paste nearest to you will be somewhat
round, and the opposite one will be straight. By pulling with the hands
the two ends of the straight side toward you, it will make it somewhat
round also; then, take hold of the paste exactly in the places where you
were pulling; put it in the mould with the side nearest to you on the
top; open it gently, and with the hands spread it so that the bottom and
sides of the mould will be perfectly lined with it. With a sharp knife
cut the paste even with the top of the mould. Line the sides of the
paste with thin slices of fat salt pork. Mix in a bowl one pound and a
half of sausage-meat with two eggs, salt, pepper, a pinch of cinnamon
and one of nutmeg; place a layer of this mixture about half an inch
thick on the bottom of the paste; then a layer of thin slices of fat
salt pork; one of slices of prairie-chicken; again a layer of
sausage-meat, one of salt pork, etc., layer upon layer, till the mould
is nearly full, finishing with a layer of sausage-meat, and giving to
the top of the _pate_ a convex form, but leaving a space of about half
an inch unfilled all around, so that the top of the _pate_ will be about
one inch higher than the sides, and half an inch higher than the sides
of the mould and paste. The cover of the _pate_ is made with the same
paste as the bottom and sides, or with puff-paste.

Roll the paste down to a thickness of about one-eighth of an inch. Glaze
the sides of the paste in the mould with egg; that is, the space (half
an inch) left unfilled; put the paste for the cover on the _pate_; press
it gently against the other paste with the fingers in order to cause the
two pastes to adhere; with a sharp knife cut off the paste even with the
mould. Make a hole in the middle and on the top of the cover about one
inch in diameter; cut five pieces of paste about three inches square,
dust them slightly with flour; place them one upon another on your left
thumb, keeping it erect; then with the right hand take hold of the
pieces, bringing the edges together so that the top will form a ball;
with a sharp knife make two cuts across and through the five pieces;
form a kind of stem as if you were to imitate a mushroom with these
pieces, and plant the stem in the hole; when baked it looks like a
flower. Glaze the cover with egg; cut strips of paste in different
shapes with a knife or paste-cutter, place them on it according to
fancy, and bake in an oven at about 390 degrees Fahr. The strips of
paste may also be glazed with egg. It will take about two hours to bake.
As soon as cold, cut the cover all around and remove it; fill the empty
places with meat or calf's-foot jelly and put it on the dish. Chop some
of the same jelly, put some all around it and on the top; cut some of it
also in fancy shapes with a knife or paste-cutter; place it all around
the dish and on the top of the _pate_, and serve.

The cut following represents a plain pie; that is, without any
decoration, and immediately after having removed the mould.

[Illustration]

_Another, or Rabbit-Pie._--Chop very fine and separately one pound of
veal, one of beef, one of lean fresh pork, three of rabbit or hare, and
three of fat fresh pork. Mix the whole well together and season with
salt, pepper, cinnamon, cloves, and nutmeg, all grated or in powder.
Line a mould with paste as directed above, put a layer of the mixture in
the mould about one inch thick, place on it slices of truffles, if handy
and liked; then another layer, truffles, etc., till the mould is full.
If filled without truffles, it is not necessary to put layer after
layer. Cover also as above, and bake in a moderately heated oven, about
320 degrees Fahr. It takes from five to six hours to bake.

_Another, or Prairie-chicken Pie._--Skin a prairie-hen (or several) and
bone it. It is not necessary in boning it for a pie to proceed as
directed for boned turkey, but merely to remove all the bones in the
easiest and quickest manner; you cannot spoil the flesh, as it is to be
chopped. Weigh the flesh when free from bones and skin. Weigh as much
of each of the following: ham, salt pork, and calf's liver. Grate the
salt pork and chop the three others very fine, and then pound the whole.
Season with salt, pepper, cloves and nutmeg, both grated, a pinch of
cinnamon and chopped parsley; mix with the whole two or three eggs, one
at a time, in order to mix better. Line a mould with paste as directed
above; line the paste with thin slices of salt pork, fill it with the
mixture, and cover, bake, finish, and serve exactly the same as the
preceding. For two prairie-hens it will require about three hours to
bake. Slices of truffles may also be used; they are mixed at the same
time with the eggs and seasonings.

_With Cold Meat._--When the paste is placed in the mould as directed
above, line it with thin slices of salt pork, then put a very thin layer
of sausage-meat, prepared also as above, then fill with butcher's meat,
poultry, and game, having previously removed all the bones, and cut the
meat in strips; the greater the variety, the better the _pate_. Put a
little of each kind of meat used in a mortar, say from one ounce to a
pound, with parsley, thyme, bay-leaf, salt and pepper; pound the whole
well and then mix with one egg, half a gill of white wine, or a
liquor-glass of brandy, to every pound of meat. Fill the hollow places
with the mixture, to which you may add a little gravy or broth if it is
not liquid enough. Place thin slices of salt pork on the top, cover with
paste as described above, cook and serve as above also.

Meat-pies, as seen above, are made with every kind of meat; with one or
several kinds at the same time, according to taste.

Wines and liquors may be used, it is only a matter of taste. The cover
may be placed with only a hole in the centre, instead of decorating it.

By using in turn butcher's meat, poultry, and game, an infinite number
of different _pates_ can easily be made.

_Terrines (Terreen, or Tureen)._--A terrine differs from a meat-pie in
this, that instead of using a tin or brass mould and lining it with
paste, a _terrine_ (French word for terreen) is used, and is only lined
with thin slices of salt pork, and closed with its cover. It is filled,
cooked, and served in the same way as a meat-pie.

_Timbale._--The name _timbale_ is given to a meat-pie when made in a
straight tin mould, lined as a _terrine_, and covered with a tin cover.
A _terrine_ or _timbale_ keeps longer in winter than the pie.

_Pains de Gibier (Pains of Game)._--This means, loaves of game. It is a
_terrine_ made with any kind of game, of one or of several kinds, with
the exception that birds are boned and filled (_see_ Directions for
Boning), before placing them in the terreen; also, before covering the
terreen, place a piece of buttered paper all around, so as to have it as
nearly air-tight as possible when covered. Bake as above, and as soon as
out of the oven remove the cover; put a piece of tin, sheet-iron, or
wood on the top, large enough to cover the meat, but not the border of
the terreen. Place some weight on it in order to press the meat down,
and leave thus over night. The weight and piece of tin are removed, the
terreen is wiped clean, the cover placed on it, and it is then served,
or served on a dish. It keeps very well in winter time, and many are
imported from Europe, especially those made like the following:

_Another._--Cut four ounces of boiled beef-tongue and one pound of
truffles in large dice. Put about two ounces of salt pork in a
frying-pan on the fire, and when fried, add about six ounces of the
flesh of prairie-hen, cut in pieces, four prairie-hens' and four chicken
livers, eight in all; stir, and when turning rather brown, add also
chopped parsley, salt, and pepper; stir again for two or three minutes,
and take off. Put in a mortar one pound of flesh of prairie-hen, baked
and chopped; one pound and a quarter of fat salt pork, and about four
ounces of _panade_. Pound the whole well and put it in a large bowl.
Then pound well also the six ounces of prairie-hen flesh and eight
livers with twelve yolks of eggs and a wine-glass of Madeira wine, and
put in the bowl also. Add to it the tongue and truffles, and mix the
whole well, adding game-gravy, or meat-gravy if more handy, about a gill
of it, season to taste with salt, pepper, nutmeg, and cloves, grated.
Bay-leaf and thyme, well pounded, may also be used, if liked. After
being pounded, the whole may be mashed through a sieve, but it is really
not necessary. Then place the mixture in one, two, or three _terrines_,
cook, and serve as above.

_Another_.--Take the flesh of six prairie-hens when cooked, and pound it
well. Pound also eight livers, fried; four of prairie-hens and four of
chickens; put flesh and livers in a saucepan with gravy, set on a slow
fire, and as soon as warm, add to it, little by little, and stirring
continually, about three-fourths of its volume of good butter. When all
the butter is in, take from the fire, mix one pound of truffles cut in
dice with it; put the mixture in one or more terrines; cover, bake, and
serve as above.

_Terrines_ and _pains_ are sometimes made with poultry, and in the same
way as those of game.

_Fish-Pies_.--These are made in the same way as meat-pies, using cooked
fish instead of meat, but putting fish only inside of the paste. When
done it is filled with _coulis of fish_ instead of jelly. Serve as a
meat-pie. The fish must be free from bones.

_Fruit-Pies._--Pies are made with paste and fruit or vegetables. The
under-paste may be made of trimmings of puff-paste, or of the paste
hereafter described, but the top is always made of puff-paste. The paste
on the top may cover the fruit entirely, or it may be only strips
running across, according to taste and fancy. The fruit is used raw or
cooked previously, according to kind; if it requires longer cooking than
the paste, or if it requires to be mixed or mashed, it must be cooked
previously.

_Under-Paste._--Put one pound of flour on the paste-board with six
ounces of butter in the middle of it; also two ounces of sugar, two
eggs, and cold water enough to make an ordinary paste, neither too stiff
nor too soft. Roll the paste down to a thickness of one-eighth of an
inch, spread it on a tin dish or bakepan, buttered slightly, raise the
borders a little or place a strip of puff-paste all around it; put the
fruit in the middle, then cover with a thin piece of puff-paste or place
strips of it only over the fruit, and bake in a rather quick oven, about
390 degrees Fahr. The strips of paste are cut with a paste-cutter
(caster-like) and placed across; one strip may also be placed all
around. When trimmings of puff-paste are used for the under-paste, when
placed on the tin or bake-pan, prick it in about a dozen places with a
fork to prevent it from rising. To place a border around the paste, you
have only to cut a strip of it about half an inch wide, wet the paste
with water by means of a brush, that is, the edge or place where you are
going to put it; then take hold of the strip, place one end of it on the
paste and run it all around till you meet the end, cut it off and stick
the two ends together by wetting them also. When the border is placed,
then put the fruit in the middle; if the fruit is not cooked, it must be
mixed with sugar and essence, or cinnamon, or nutmeg, according to
kind, if cooked, that is, stewed, or in _compote_ or in jelly, it is
sweetened and flavored.

The following are used to make pies: _apples_, _apricots_, _cherries_,
_currants_, _blackberries_, _cranberries_, _gooseberries_, _grapes_,
_mulberries_, _oranges_, _peaches_, _pears_, _pine-apples_, _plums_,
_quinces_, _raspberries_, _lemon_, _rhubarb_, _prunes_,
_whortleberries_, etc. It is better to stone the fruit before using it.
Pies are decorated in the three following ways:

1. When you use cooked fruit, put a thin layer of rice (prepared as for
_croquettes_) on the paste, then a layer of stewed fruit; then the
strips over, and bake. Two or three layers of each may be used.

2. When baked, spread over the pie some syrup of apples, of pears, or
syrup for _compotes_.

3. Just before serving, spread some _creme legere_ on the top,
tastefully and fancifully, by means of a paper funnel, or with the
pastry-bag.

_Tarts and Tartelettes._--These are small pies. Instead of using a tin
dish or a bakepan, you use small tin moulds, such as for _madeleines_,
and proceed exactly as for pies.

_Mince-Pie._--Every thing used to make a mince-pie is chopped fine, and
the spices are used in powder. Prepare paste as directed for meat-pies,
and make it either with or without mould. Proportions: to three pounds
of beef add six pounds of beef-suet, one pound of currants, one of
prunes, one of raisins, and one of apples, the rind of two lemons, two
ounces of citron, and one pound of any kind of comfited fruit; nutmeg,
mace, cinnamon, cloves, and sugar to taste; also wine or brandy, or
both, to taste. Bake in a moderately heated oven. The fruits may be used
candied or fresh, the apples fresh or dried, it is a matter of taste.
Twenty kinds of fruits and meat may be used as well as three or four;
there are no rules to make a mince-pie, since its compounds are not used
to be tasted at all separately, but as a whole.

_Pot-Pie._--Make a paste with one pound of flour, two ounces of butter,
two ounces of beef-suet (the latter prepared as directed for
puff-paste), a little salt and water, enough to make a rather stiff
paste; roll it down to a thickness of about a quarter of an inch and
fold it in three and roll down again; repeat the process half a dozen
times, the last time leaving it rolled down and of the thickness above
mentioned. Line the sides of a pot with it, lay slices or strips of salt
pork on the bottom of the pot, then fill it with strips of meat, any and
every kind (slices of potatoes may be added, if liked); season with
salt, pepper, nutmeg, and cinnamon; fill with water or broth; cover with
some of the same paste; cover the pan and boil gently till done. When
the cover of paste is laid on, make a hole in the centre to let the
steam out, and to fill up with water or broth if it boils away. Run a
sharp-pointed knife or a skewer through, to ascertain when done. Serve
warm. Proceed as above either for butcher's meat, chicken, and other
domestic fowls, or game.

Puddings.--Puddings are made of several materials and in a hundred
different ways. Some are cooked by boiling, others are baked, and some
are both boiled and baked. Puddings for inhabitants of cities ought to
be made as light as possible. For persons working outside and at manual
labor, it does not matter, because their food passes through the system
in a short time. It is very well known that the poorer class of
Americans eat too much pudding and pie. Many do it for economy, others
for convenience. The former are mistaken, and the latter are blamable.
Puddings and pies cost more in the end than meat properly and carefully
prepared. We do not mean to do away with them entirely, but we advise
every one to do with puddings as with every thing else, "use, but do not
abuse." "Pies, cakes, and sweetmeats, are universally known to be
poisoning to children, and the mothers who give them are conscious that
they are purchasing the momentary smile of satisfaction at the risk of
after-sickness, and perhaps of incurable disease."--Peter Parley.

The above needs no commentary; we only recommend it to the consideration
of young mothers.

_For Convenience._--We have taken the trouble to put questions about it
to over three hundred mothers, wives of mechanics or of employes at a
comparatively small salary, and we are sorry to say, that more than
ninety per cent. gave us about the same answer--they make and cook cakes
in one day, enough to feed the whole family for three days, to save the
trouble of cooking every day. We cannot see where the trouble can be for
a good wife and mother to prepare her husband and children's dinner.

Pudding-eating is an English custom; but, before following a custom of
another country, people ought to consider if that custom or fashion
(whatever it is) has not been introduced into that country by necessity,
which is the case of pudding-eating in England and in some parts of
Holland.

In England, where the fog is nearly perpetual, the stomach requires to
be filled with something heavy, something that will stay there till the
next meal, and very often longer than that.

It is well known that in England farm hands, or other persons working in
the open air, eat six times a day, and have pudding at least three
times; they drink home-brewed beer, which is very heavy, and very rich
also. Let anyone here, in this pure, clear atmosphere, eat six times a
day, have pudding three times, with a pint of home-brewed beer every
time, and see how he will feel in the evening. We beg all, who may doubt
our observations, to try the experiment.

Pastry in general, no matter how light it may be made, lies heavier on
the stomach than any other food, and is very difficult of digestion.
There are thousands of persons that have never had any indigestion but
of pastry. Children like pastry very much; this is easily understood; as
their young stomachs digest very rapidly, they crave food oftener than
grown persons. Pastry being easier to have at any time than any thing
else, it is given to them; and from habit in youth arises the liking
when grown up. The stomach, being accustomed to it from infancy, may
digest it better, but it is always at the expense of the whole system;
the stomach must work hard, too hard in digesting it; whence come
dyspepsia, weakness, and finally consumption, or debility, or any other
sickness of the same kind.

The cut below represents a pudding (any kind), made in a mould,
scalloped, and hollow in the middle; any kind of mould may be used for
puddings.

[Illustration]

_Bread-Pudding._--Soak half a ten-cent loaf in milk for about an hour,
and squeeze it with the hands; place the bread in a bowl and mix well
with it a gill of milk, three tablespoonfuls of sugar, one ounce of
citron, cut rather fine, four ounces of raisins, four ounces of melted
butter, four yolks of eggs. Then beat the four whites of the eggs to a
stiff froth and mix them with the rest. Grease a mould well with butter,
dust it with bread-crumbs, turn the mixture into it, and bake. The mould
must not be more than about two-thirds full. About 400 degrees Fahr. is
the proper heat for a bread-pudding. It takes about forty minutes to
bake. Serve with a sauce for pudding, hot or cold, according to taste.

_Cabinet Pudding._--A cabinet pudding is made in any kind of a mould and
of any size, with sponge-cake or lady's fingers. Butter a mould well; if
the butter is too firm, warm it so as to grease the mould better. Slice
some citron and cut it in lozenges or of any other shape, according to
fancy, and place tastefully on the bottom of the mould; place some
raisins all around also. It is not necessary to cover the bottom with
them, but have some here and there, imitating flowers, stars, etc. Then
put over them a layer of sponge-cake, cut in strips of any length and
about half an inch thick; on this layer place some citron, some comfited
(candied) fruit of one or several kinds, and all cut in dice, also some
raisins; then another layer of cake, some more fruit, and so on, till
the mould is full. After having placed the citron and raisins on the
bottom, it is not necessary to put the rest in with care or order, but
merely fill the mould with them and so that they are all mixed up. Set
about a pint of milk on the fire and take it off as soon as it rises.
Mix well in a bowl three ounces of sugar with three yolks of eggs, then
turn the milk into the bowl, little by little, stirring and mixing the
while, and pour the mixture over the cake, fruit, etc., into the mould.
The above quantities of milk, sugar, and eggs are for a middling-sized
pudding, and it will be very easy to make more or less, according to the
size of the pudding. The mixture must be poured over in sprinkling, and
it must nearly cover the whole within about half an inch. It must not be
poured too slowly, for, the cake absorbing the liquor pretty fast, you
would have too much of it if you were filling as directed above; we mean
filling till the mould is nearly full. Place the mould in a pan of cold
water so that it is about one-third covered by it, set on the fire, and
as soon as it boils, place the whole, pan and mould, in an oven at about
380 degrees Fahr., and bake. For a middling-sized one it takes about one
hour. When done, place a dish over the mould, turn upside down, remove
the mould, and serve with a sauce for puddings.

_With Vermicelli._--Blanch four ounces of vermicelli, drain and drop it
in cold water and drain again. While the vermicelli is cooking, put
about a quart of milk in a saucepan on the fire with two ounces of sugar
and a piece of lemon-rind, stir now and then to dissolve the sugar, and
as soon as the milk rises, take it from the fire, remove the lemon, then
turn the vermicelli into it, put back on the fire, add a tablespoonful
of butter, stir continually, and when the vermicelli is well cooked,
take off, mix well with the whole four eggs and sugar to taste. Turn the
mixture into a well-buttered mould, place it in a pan of boiling water,
boil slowly for ten minutes, then place as it is, pan and mould, in a
moderately-heated oven to finish the cooking. It will take from fifteen
to twenty minutes. Proceed as above with _macaroni_, _tapioca_, etc.

_Plum-Pudding._--Break with the hands, in small pieces, about twelve
ounces of the soft part of good and well-baked bread, not too fresh, but
not stale, and grate it. Clean twelve ounces of raisins and currants,
half of each. Cut in small dice four ounces of citron and four ounces of
candied orange-rind. Chop fine the rind of a lemon. Butter a towel
slightly and dust it with flour, slightly also. Take twelve ounces of
good fresh beef-suet, remove the fibres and skin as well as possible,
and chop it rather fine with three or four ounces of flour, and which
put in a large bowl. Mix with it seven eggs and half a pound of sugar.
It is believed by many that brown sugar is better than white, but it is
only a belief, if not a prejudice. Add and mix again the bread, the
raisins, and currants, the citron, and orange-rind. Having the whole
thoroughly mixed, add half a gill of French brandy or Jamaica rum, a
little salt, the lemon-rind, half a gill of cream or a little milk, and
a little grated cinnamon. Place the mixture on the towel, and tie it as
fast as possible, giving it a round shape. Drop the towel in boiling
water, and boil for from four to five hours. Some boil a plum-pudding as
long as seven hours. It may also be boiled in a mould for that purpose,
but it is easier in a towel and quite as good. When taken from the
water, remove the towel, cut a little piece of the pudding off to make
it stand better on the dish. The place cut off is generally where the
towel was tied, being the less smooth. The cut following shows a
plum-pudding boiled in a towel.

Serve with a sauce for puddings. The sauce may be served in a boat, or
spread all over the pudding. When served the second day, or cold for
supper, it is cut in slices; some Jamaica rum is poured over it, then
set on fire, basting as long as it burns, and serve. It is generally
burnt on the table, but the rum may be poured over in the kitchen. The
cut below represents a whole one with rum around it and on fire.

[Illustration]

_Biscottes._--Put half a pound of flour on the paste-board and make a
hole in the middle of it; put in the hole four ounces of sugar, one
ounce of butter, three yolks of eggs, and a few drops of essence to
flavor the cakes. Mix and knead the whole well with the hand. When like
dough, roll it under your hands and bring it to a rope-like form of
about three-quarters of an inch in diameter; cut it in pieces about two
inches long; roll again with the hand so as to make a ball of each; then
roll again with both hands so as to give each piece a round, elongated,
olive shape; that is, smaller at each end than at the middle. Put them
in a baking-pan, greased with butter; glaze each piece well with egg and
a little sugar beaten together, then, with a sharp knife, which you dip
in flour, make a cut on the top and into each cake, lengthwise, about
three-quarters through, and bake in an oven at 350 degrees Fahr. Serve
cold. It is an excellent cake for tea as well as for dessert.

_With Almonds._--Add to the above mixture one ounce of pounded almonds.

_With Filberts or Hazel-nuts._--Add to the mixture for _biscottes_, one
ounce of filberts or hazel-nuts, pounded well.

_Brioche._--Mix together on the paste-board, one pound of flour, six
eggs, one pound of butter, four ounces of leaven prepared as directed,
and tepid water enough to make a rather soft dough, then beat well. The
longer it is beaten the better, and the lighter the _brioche_ will be.
By beating we mean--take hold of the dough with the right hand, raise it
and then throw it with force on the board and in the same place where it
was; repeat that till it comes off your hand without any of the paste
sticking to it. Put the mixture in a tin vessel, set it in a warm place
(about 78 deg. Fahr.) for about two hours to rise, and then put immediately
on ice to cool. When cold, put it back on the paste-board, cut off about
one-fourth of it. Make a kind of crown with the larger piece, but not a
very large one; let the hole in the middle be about three inches in
diameter. Then give the other piece a rope-like shape, about
three-quarters of an inch in diameter; place it over the crown, giving
it the shape of a star, and bake in an oven at 430 deg.. Serve warm, without
sauce.

[Illustration]

_Baba._--Mix together and beat as for a _brioche_, one pound of flour,
ten eggs, one pound and a quarter of butter, four ounces of raisins,
four ounces of citron, four ounces of leaven, about half a pound of
different kinds of fruits, preserved in syrup or candied, all cut fine;
put to rise, let cool, shape, bake and serve as a _brioche_.

A _baba_ may be baked in a mould; the cut on the previous page
represents one.

_Croquignolles._--Put in a bowl four ounces of flour, a teaspoonful of
sugar, a pinch of salt, half a pound of butter, four whites of eggs, and
a few drops of essence; mix the whole well so as to make a very stiff
paste. Then put the mixture on the paste-board, and roll it in a
rope-like form about half an inch in diameter; then cut it in pieces
about half an inch long, glaze with yolk of egg, dust with sugar, and
bake in a warm but not quick oven. Serve cold at tea.

_Galette._--Knead together half a pound of flour, six ounces of butter,
two eggs, and a pinch of salt; roll it down to a thickness of a quarter
of an inch, put in a bake-pan in the oven, and when nearly done, take
off; mix well together one egg with a gill of cream and an ounce of
butter, while the _galette_ is in the oven, spread the mixture over it,
put back in the oven, finish the cooking, and serve cold at tea.

_Genoises._--Put in a large bowl six ounces of flour, eight of sugar,
two eggs, a liquor-glass of brandy or rum, and a few drops of essence;
mix and stir the whole well for three minutes, then add two more eggs,
stir and mix one minute longer, add again four eggs and continue
stirring one minute longer. Melt half a pound of butter in another bowl,
and mix with it about two tablespoonfuls of the mixture; when, turn into
the other bowl and mix the whole well together. Butter a bakepan, spread
the mixture in it, and bake in a rather slow oven (about 300 deg. Fahr.).
When the top is well baked, turn it over and finish it. When cold, cut
the whole in strips about two inches long, then again across so as to
make pieces of a lozenge-shape, and serve as it is or with a _sauce for
puddings_.

_The same, with Almonds._--Pound well four or six ounces of sweet
almonds, place them in the bowl with the rest, and then mix, bake, and
serve as the above one.

Do the same with _bitter almonds_, _hazel-nuts_, _peanuts_, _filberts_,
and _raisins_; flavor with any kind of essence.

_With Chocolate._--When the cake is cut in pieces, glaze it as directed
for _eclair au chocolat_.

_With Sweetmeats._--When the cake is cut in pieces, with a sharp-pointed
knife, cut off a part of each piece, on the top and right in the centre,
so as to make a small hole, which you fill with any kind of sweetmeat or
with any _cream_, and then serve. When thus served, they are called
under several names.

_Macaroons._--Throw into boiling water for five minutes ten ounces of
sweet almonds, and two ounces of bitter ones; skin them well; put in a
mortar, and pound them to a paste, adding a few drops of the white of
eggs during the process. Grind well also a pound of white sugar, with
the quarter of a rind of lemon well grated; then mix well together
almonds, sugar, and the whites of two eggs. Make balls of any size with
it; put the balls on a piece of paper, beat the yolk of an egg with half
a gill of water, and glaze the top of the balls with it by means of a
brush; put them in a slow oven; it will take about fifteen minutes to
cook them.

_Macaroons with Chocolate._--Melt on a slow fire and in a tin pan three
ounces of chocolate without sugar (known as Baker's chocolate); then
work it to a thick paste with one pound of pulverized sugar, and three
whites of eggs. Roll the mixture down to a thickness of about
one-quarter of an inch; cut it in small round pieces with a
paste-cutter, either plain or scalloped; butter a pan slightly and dust
it with flour and sugar, half of each, place the pieces of paste or
mixture in and bake in a hot but not quick oven. Serve cold.

_Madeleines._--Mix well together in a bowl three ounces of sugar, three
of flour, and two eggs, then again one ounce of melted butter and a few
drops of essence to flavor. Butter slightly small tin moulds, dust them
slightly also with flour and sugar, half of each, turn the mixture in,
filling the moulds only two-thirds full, and bake in an oven at about
340 deg.. Serve cold.

_The same, with Almonds._--Chop rather fine some sweet almonds, and when
the mixture is in the moulds as described above, spread the almonds over
them; bake, and serve as above.

Do the same with _hazel-nuts_, _filberts_, _peanuts_, or _raisins_.

_Meringues or Kisses._--Put half a pound of pulverized sugar in a plate,
beat six whites of eggs to a stiff froth as directed, then have somebody
to sprinkle the half pound of sugar into the eggs, and while you are
still beating, which must be done in two seconds; stop beating and mix
gently with a spoon, not by stirring but by turning the whole upside
down several times. If it is stirred too much, it may turn too liquid.
Put the mixture in the pastry-bag, with tin tube No. 2 at the end of it;
spread the mixture on paper in a baking-pan, in oblong cakes about three
inches long; dust them with pulverized sugar, and put in an oven at from
220 deg. to 230 deg. Fahr. It requires some time to dry them, about one hour. As
soon as taken from the oven, place one in your left hand, the top
downward; press gently on the under side which is up, with the first
finger of the right hand, so as to make a hollow; put in that hollow
twice as much cream as is necessary to fill it; place another cake
prepared alike over the cream; so that the two will be united and kept
together by the cream; do the same with the rest; place them tastefully
on a dish; dust them with sugar, and serve. They are generally filled
with _whipped cream_, but may be filled with _creme legere_ or _creme
cuite_. They may also be filled with _creme Chantilly_.

_Swiss Meringue._--Instead of squeezing the mixture out and spreading it
in oblong cakes, make a crown of it, then another and another, four in
all, dust and bake in the same way; place them on a dish, one above the
other, and fill the middle of the dish with cream as above. Serve cold.
The mixture may also be placed on paper by the spoonful, but they are
not as sightly as by means of the pastry-bag.

_Zephyrs._--Proceed as for meringues as far as mixing the sugar with the
whites of eggs, when mix also with both a few drops of cochineal. Put
the mixture in the pastry-bag, with tin tube No. 1 at the end of it.
Squeeze the mixture out and spread it on paper in a baking-pan, in
different shapes: dentilated, convoluted, overlapping, waved, etc.,
according to fancy, about three inches and a half long. Bake in same
oven as meringues, and serve when cold, as they are.

_Nougat._--Throw a pound of sweet almonds into boiling water for five
minutes; skin them well, and when cool cut them in four or five pieces
lengthwise; then melt a pound of fine white sugar with two spoonfuls of
water, in a copper or crockery pan, and on a good fire, stirring all
the time with a wooden spoon; when well melted, put the almonds in;
keep stirring about five minutes longer, take from the fire, add a
little of the rind of a lemon well grated, oil the mould, put it on the
corner of the range in a warm but not too hot place; put the almonds and
sugar in the mould, and little by little take off when of a brown color,
turn on a plate, remove the mould, and serve.

_Pancakes._--Make a thin paste with one pound of flour, four eggs, two
tablespoonfuls of sweet-oil, one of French brandy, a little salt, the
necessary quantity of lukewarm water and milk, about half of each; let
it remain thus two or three hours at least; then put about an ounce of
lard, butter, or oil in a frying-pan, and set it on a brisk fire; when
hot, put some of the paste in it with a ladle, spread the paste so as to
cover the bottom of the pan; fry on both sides, place it on a dish, dust
it with fine white sugar on both sides, and serve warm.

Buckwheat and other pancakes are made in the same way.

_Waffles._--Make a thin paste with eight ounces of flour, six ounces of
pulverized sugar, two eggs, a few drops of essence to flavor, half a
liquor-glass of brandy or rum, and milk. Warm and butter both sides of
the mould, put some of the paste into it, close it gently, set it on the
fire, turn over to heat both sides equally, dust them with sugar when
done, and serve either warm or cold. It takes hardly a minute for each
with a good fire.


  BREAD.

It is next to an impossibility to bake bread in a small oven; half the
time the bread is too much or not enough baked. In cities, where good
baker's bread can be bought, it comes as cheap as it can be made at
home, if not cheaper, and saves a great deal of time and labor. It is
not difficult to make good bread with good flour. There are several ways
of making and of using yeast. Some are better than others; but many,
though differently manipulated, bring about the same results. The only
difficulty is the baking of it. Bakers can almost always bake bread
properly, having large brick ovens. If they do not bake their bread
enough, which is generally the case, it is not because they cannot, but
because under-baked bread is heavier, and people, especially the poorer
class, buy it in preference to the other; judging by the weight, they
think they have more of it for a certain sum of money. Under-baked bread
is difficult of digestion. (_See_ Food.)

The best bread is made with the best wheat-flour, all that can be said
by anybody to the contrary notwithstanding. Rye, corn, and barley bread
are excellent, and may be partaken of by those whose constitution,
occupation, etc., allow it. In every thing, bread included, the people,
or what may be called "the million," are wiser than _soi-disant_
philosophers; and if oat-meal or Indian-meal were better than
wheat-flour, they would be dearer. To describe or discuss the
innumerable methods of making bread would require several volumes. We
have perused carefully hundreds of them; they nearly all differ
theoretically, but practically, when practical (which is not always the
case), they amount to about the same thing. We think that the only
difficulty, if difficulty there be, is in the use of the yeast, the
making of the same, and the baking. Chemical processes for rising will
never equal the processes of nature and time. Many bakers do not use the
yeast properly, their bread being sour or musty; some sweeten their
bread, to disguise an inferior quality of flour, or as an antidote to
sourness or mustiness.

Bread gets dry after a while, and is inferior in quality and taste. The
lighter the bread the better, although many do not think so. The belief
may come from the fact that the lighter bread is the more porous, and
therefore the quicker it evaporates and loses its taste. Warm bread,
besides being injurious to the teeth, is difficult of digestion. When
perfectly cold, let it stand in a dry place, neither cold nor warm, for
one or two hours, and use. We give below the best methods of making
bread--French bread, or rather good light bread, for we do not see that
it is more French than Chinese or American, as long as it can be made
everywhere with good flour; it is certainly the best for inhabitants of
a large city, and especially for those having a sedentary occupation.
Let us apply the proverb to bread as well as to every thing else: "Feed
me with food convenient for me."--_Bible._

Mix well together one gill of good strong yeast with half a pound of
flour, so that it makes a rather stiff paste. Knead so that you shape it
like a ball. Make two cuts with a knife on the top, across and about
one-quarter of an inch deep; then place the paste in a bowl of tepid
water (milk-warm), the cuts upward. After it has been in the water for a
few minutes it will float and swell; let it float about two minutes,
when take off and use. Put six ounces of flour on the paste-board, and
make a hole in the middle; put into it the yeast prepared as above,
tepid water enough to make an ordinary dough, and salt to taste. Knead
well, shape according to fancy, put in a warm place (about 78 deg.
Fahr.) to rise, and bake. It requires about six hours to rise.

_Another._--Wash and clean thoroughly half a pound of potatoes, and then
steam them with the skins on. Mash them well with half a pint of flour,
about half a pint of tepid water, and half an ounce of salt. When
thoroughly mixed, put away in a warm place (about 78 deg. Fahr.) for one
hour. Then add and mix with it half a pint of good yeast, and put away
in the same place for about nine hours. It may take a little longer than
nine hours or a little less, but it is very easy to know, and in this
way: after a while it will rise slowly and gradually for some time, and
then begin to fall; as soon as it begins to fall, mix a little tepid
water with it and strain through a sieve; throw away potato skins and
eyes; mix what is strained with two pounds of flour and tepid water
enough to make an ordinary dough. Put it away again in the same place
until it cracks on the top, which will take place in about an hour. Then
put six pounds of flour on the paste-board, and make a hole in the
middle; put into it a little tepid water and the dough when cracked;
knead the whole well with water enough to make an ordinary dough, salt
to taste. To knead it well, it is necessary to raise the dough or part
of it, and then throw it back on the paste-board with force. The more
the dough is kneaded, the better and lighter the bread. Then shape the
loaves, let rise, and bake in a very quick oven.

_To shape._--Divide the dough, as soon as kneaded, in as many parts as
you wish to make loaves; then knead each part, one after another, so as
to make a kind of ball; then, by rolling and pulling it, give it an
elongated, sausage-like shape. A pound loaf can be made a foot and a
half long, as well as four inches; it will only be narrower and thinner,
and will have more crust. When the dough is thus elongated, take a round
stick or a small rolling-pin, place it on the top of the dough, right on
the middle, lengthwise, and then press on it and roll just a little, to
and fro, so as to make a kind of furrow in the middle. Have a towel
well dusted with flour, place the dough on it upside down, that is, the
furrowed side under; let rise as ordinary bread; turn it into a pan, but
so that the furrowed side will be up (the side that was down in rising
must be up in baking); dust the furrow well with rye-flour to prevent
the paste from closing, so that the top of the loaf will be concave
instead of convex when baked.

_Another._--Steam half a pound of potatoes and mash them well; then mix
them immediately and while hot with about a pint of flour, a quart of
water, and half a pint of good strong yeast. Leave the mixture six hours
in a rather warm place, then strain through a sieve, pressing the
potato-skins so as to squeeze all the liquid out of them. Immediately
add to the strained mixture flour enough to make ordinary dough, which
you knead a little, and let stand as it is from one to two hours and a
half, according to temperature. Knead then with it about six pounds of
flour, salt to taste, and tepid water to make ordinary dough, and leave
it thus two hours, then shape in the same way as the above; put it to
rise in the same way also (it will take from one to two hours, according
to temperature); dust with rye-flour, and bake.

French bread may be shaped like other bread, round or square; it is just
as good.

Rolls, or rather French rolls as they are generally called, are made,
shaped, and baked in the same way.

It is a mistake to call _bread_ certain mixtures of flour, soda, and
milk; or flour, milk, and butter, etc.; it is no more bread than a
mixture of carbonic acid, water, alcohol, molasses, vitriol, etc., is
wine. No one can give a name to such a mixture except chemists.




  BILLS OF FARE.


_Dinner-Time._--On account of the various occupations of members of the
same family, this is often the first and only time of the day that sees
them all assembled. It is the dinner that mostly supplies the waste that
the system has undergone for twenty-four hours. Being taken after the
day's work is over, it gives to the stomach time to digest (mind and
stomach never working at the same time). (_See_ Food, Economy, Coffee,
and Tea.)

The dinner, being the most substantial meal of the day, requires more
preparation than any other meal; the bill of fare of it should,
therefore, be made the day before, or at least early in the morning. It
should always be made between the mistress or master of the house and
the cook; written and hung in the kitchen, near the clock. The first
thing to put down is what may be left from the preceding day, and also
what may be in the larder; then what is wanted in butcher's meat or
poultry, or both; the fish or game, or both, and which, with vegetables,
are according to the market. It is then one of the duties of the cook to
make a list of what is wanted as accessories; such as flour, eggs,
sugar, spices, etc.

Besides the above, it is also the duty of the cook to send the dishes to
the table in their regular order; for, if the whole dinner is sent at
once, all the dishes have to be eaten at once also, else the last get
cold and are unpalatable, or, by mixing them, they are rendered
tasteless, as the flavor of one neutralizes (if it does not destroy) the
taste of another.

To make models of bills of fare is not difficult, but to follow them is
nearly impossible; hardly one in a hundred would suit any one.

Bills of fare vary according to the season of the year, and therefore to
the produce in the market.

We will try to give another, and we think a better way of making them to
suit everybody, every purse, and at any time.

A dinner, no matter how grand, is composed of three courses, and seven
kinds of dishes.

The first course comprises dishes of four kinds, viz.: potages,
_hors-d'oeuvres_, _releves_, _and entrees_.

The second course comprises dishes of two kinds, viz.: _rots_ and
_entremets_.

The third course comprises dishes of one kind, the dessert.

The number of dishes of each kind is generally according to the number
of guests.

It may also be according to the importance of the occasion for which the
dinner is given; to the honor the giver or givers wish to show the
personage or personages invited; to the amount of money they are willing
to spend, etc.

The following table shows how many dishes of each kind are to be served
at dinner to a certain number of persons:

  -----+-+-+-+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+---+----------------------------------------
  For..|2|4|6|10|16|20|30|40|50|60|80|100| Persons.
  Serve|1|1|1| 2| 2| 2| 4| 4| 4| 6| 8|  8| Potages.
    "  |2|2|2| 4| 4| 6| 6|10|10|12|12| 16| Hors-d'oeuvres.
    "  |1|1|1| 2| 2| 2| 4| 4| 4| 6| 8|  8| Releves of fish.
    "  |1|1|1| 2| 2| 2| 4| 4| 4| 6| 8|  8|   "     of meat.
    "  |2|2|2| 4| 4| 4| 8| 8| 8|12|16| 16| Entrees.
    "  |1|1|1| 2| 2| 2| 4| 4| 4| 6| 8|  8| Rots.
    "  |1|1|1| 2| 2| 2| 4| 4| 4| 6| 8|  8| Salads of greens.
    "  |2|2|2| 4| 4| 4| 8| 8| 8|12|16| 16| Entremets.
    "  | | | |  |  | 2| 2| 2| 4| 4| 6|  8| Large side pieces of Releves & Entrees.
    "  | | | |  |  |  |  | 2| 2| 4| 4|  6|   "   cakes.
    "  |4|4|4| 8| 8| 8|16|16|16|24|32| 36| Plates of Dessert.
  -----+-+-+-+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+---+----------------------------------------

The above table shows the number of dishes, but more than one dish of
the same kind can be served; for instance, four kinds of potages,
_releves_, etc., are served for forty; but two or four dishes of each
kind can be served.

The size of the _releves_ and _rots_ should be according to the number
of guests.

It is just as easy to select dishes for a small family-dinner as for a
grand one; two, three, four, or more dishes can be selected; for
instance, you select a potage, an _entree_ or _rot_, or both, one
vegetable or a sweet dish, or both; and one or as many plates of dessert
as you please.

Have a bouquet on the middle of the table, if possible, or at least a
basket of fruit. Flowers during dinner have the same effect as music
after it; they soften the manners, and gently and sweetly gratify the
senses.

To simplify and render the making of bills of fare easy, we have divided
the different dishes into seven parts, each part being in the order the
dishes of which must be served, and representing the seven kinds of
dishes composing a dinner. By this means you select the dish or dishes
which suit you, and which you can procure in any or all of the seven
parts, and your bill of fare is made, and more to your liking than any
steward on earth can do.

_Order of dishes._--1. _Potages_. 2. _hors-d'oeuvres_. 3. _Releves_: of
fish, and then of meat. 4. _Entrees_: beef, mutton, lamb, veal, fish,
poultry, and game last. 5. _Rots_: of meat, and then of fish. 6.
_Entremets_: salads of greens, vegetables, eggs, macaroni, sweet dishes,
and cakes. 7. _Dessert_: cheese the first.

_First part_, or _Potages_.--Any kind coming under the head of potages
or soups.

_Second part_, or _hors-d'oeuvres_.--These are small dishes placed on
the table as soon as the soup-dish is removed or even before, and which
are removed just before serving the sweet dishes of the _entremets_.
They are passed round after every dish, on account of being considered
more as appetizers, as repairers of the natural waste of animal life.
Very little of them is partaken of at a time; they are _anchovies_;
_artichockes_, raw; pickled _beets_; _butter_; _caviare_; _cervelas_;
raw _cucumbers_; _figs_; every kind of _fish_, salted, smoked, pickled,
or preserved in oil; every kind of _pickled fruit_; _horse-radish_;
_horse-radish butter_; _melons_; broiled _mushrooms_; _olives_; raw and
pickled _oysters_; steamed _potatoes_ served with butter; _radishes_ and
butter; _sardines_; _saucissons_; _sausages_, salt and smoked, but not
fresh; salted and smoked _tongue_; _tunny_, _walnuts_ in salad.

_Third part_, or _Releves_.--_Releves_ are composed of fish and large
pieces of meat. A fish served whole is always a _releve_; in pieces, it
is an _entree_. Pieces of _beef_, _mutton_, and _pork_, roasted, are
always served as _releves_. At a family dinner the _releve_ is almost
always a fish. The other pieces of meat that are served as _releves_
are: _bear_, _buffalo_, boiled and corned _beef_, _leg_ and _saddle_ of
mutton, _quarters_ of lamb, large pieces of _veal_; also all
_vol-au-vent_ of meat and of fish, _bouchees_ and _fish-pies_.

_Fourth part_, or _Entrees_.--These comprise every dish of meat, except
poultry and game, when roasted; every dish of _fish_ not served whole;
also _pates de foies gras_, _sour-krout_, _snails_, _meat-pies_,
_terrines_, _pains_ of game and of poultry. The dishes of _meat_
mentioned in the _releves_ may be served as entrees at a family dinner.
The order of the dishes is described above.

_Fifth part_, or _Rots_.--_Poultry_, _game_, and _fish_. At a family
dinner, _lamb_ and _veal_ are often served as roasted pieces, especially
at seasons when there is no game, and poultry is scarce.

_Sixth part_, or _Entremets_.--The following are served as _entremets_:
all _salads_ of greens; all dishes of _vegetables_, of _omelets_, except
four, viz., with bacon, salt pork, ham, and kidneys. Also dishes of
_macaroni_, of _rice_, _eggs a la neige_, all _sweet dishes_ (sweet
dishes are also served as _dessert_), and _cakes_; such as _baba_,
_brioche_, _genoises_, _madeleines_, _savarin_, and sponge-cake.

_Seventh part_, or _Dessert_.--The dessert comprises ripe _fruit_,
_sweet dishes_ (these are also served as _entremets_, according to
taste), _pastry_ (except meat-pies, _terrines_, and _pains_), _salads_
of fruits, and cheese. The latter is always served the first (_see_
Cheese). After cheese, there is no rule for serving the other plates of
dessert; it is according to each one's taste.

_Punch_ is served after the _entrees_ or after the _releves_ of fish,
according to taste.

_Early Breakfast_.--We are of opinion that everybody ought to eat as
little meat as possible, and drink no wine, beer, or any other liquor at
an early breakfast, no matter what the sex or age may be, except when
prescribed by the physician in case of sickness, debility, etc. The food
may be selected from the following: _bread_ and _butter_, _eggs_,
_omelets_, fried _fish_, fried _vegetables_, _sardines_, and _fruit_,
according to the season.

As for meat, in case it should be eaten, it ought to be cold, such as
fowl or veal, cooked the day before.

Muffins, and other cakes or pastes, served warm, are very bad for the
stomach and teeth.

The beverage ought to be either coffee, with milk, chocolate, cocoa,
choca, or cold water, but do not by any means drink tea at breakfast; it
is too astringent.

Although cold meat is not by far so injurious as warm meat for
breakfast, it ought, nevertheless, to be as little partaken of as
possible, and especially by the young.

_Late Breakfast, Lunch, Tea, and early Supper_.--At these meals the
following dishes may be served:

Every dish served as a _hors-d'oeuvre_, _calf's_ head and feet, bear
_hams_, _head-cheese_, _eggs_ cooked in any way, _omelets_, _mutton_
chops, _veal_ cutlets, fried _fish_, ripe _fruit_, boned _birds_, _ham_,
cold _meat_ of any kind, _oysters_, _pate de foies gras_, _salads_ of
chicken, or any other birds, and of lobster, _sandwiches_, _sardines_,
fried _vegetables_, _sweet dishes_, and _pastry_.

_Late Supper_.--This being the last meal taken before retiring, persons
should be careful about what they eat then, especially those who take no
bodily exercise, or retire soon after it. Some are not aware that their
rest depends nearly, if not entirely, on what they have eaten at supper.
The lighter the food the better; such as fried _fish_, _sardines_, _lait
de poule_, _bavaroise_, well-ripened _fruit_, a _cream_, a little _iced
fruit_, _fruit-jelly_, _prunes_, etc.

The gastronomical or hygienic rule to be observed in eating, it will be
seen, is therefore, after the soup and _hors-d'oeuvres_, to commence
with the heaviest or most substantial dishes, and to finish with the
lightest. The rule is just the opposite for wines. Here we must commence
with the lightest, and end with those which contain the most alcohol,
and are consequently the heaviest.




  INDEX.

  Allumettes, 413.
  Almonds, 44.
  Anchovy, 144.
    butter, 99.
    cake, 428.
    salad, 353.
  Anise, 16.
  Apples, au beurre, 378.
    charlotte, 379.
    dumplings, 431.
    flambantes, 378.
    fried, 400.
    meringuees, 379.
    pie, 440.
    syrup, 380.
    in compote, or stewed, 385.
     " fritters, 379.
     " jelly, 4.
    pine-apple, 380.
    with rice, 374.
      "  sweetmeats, 380.
  Apricots, 16.
    in compote, 385.
     " jelly 406.
     " salad, 352.
    iced, 397.
  Artichokes, 306.
    fried, 306.
    (Jerusalem), 307.
  Asparagus, 307.
    fried, 308.
    en petits pois, 307.
    in omelet, 308.
    with cream, 308.
      "  vinaigrette, 308.
      "  white sauce, 308.
  Aspic, 275.

  Baba, 449.
  Bacon, 16.
  Bain-marie, 16.
  Bakepans, 17.
  Baking, 9.
  Bananas, 393.
  Barley, 76.
    lemonade, 44.
    sugar, 45.
  Bass, 132, 135, 136.
  Batter, 30.
  Bavaroise, 45.
  Bay-leaf, 17.
  Beans (string), 308.
    au jus, 309.
    maitre d'hotel, 309.
    in salad, 309, 350.
    with onions, 309.
    pickled, 353.
    (Lima), 309.
    au jus, 310.
    (dry), 310.
    maitre d'hotel, 310.
    with ham, 311.
      "  mutton, 311.
      "  salt pork, 310.
    in puree, 120.
    stewed, 311.
  Bear-meat, 277.
    ham, 277.
  Beef, 162.
    a la mode, 163.
    baked, 167.
    in daube, 164.
    roasted, 165.
    with garnitures, 166.
    decorated, 167.
    stewed, 164.
    fillet larded, 168.
      with mushrooms, 169.
        "  truffles, 169.
        "  potatoes, 169.
        "  tomatoes, 169.
        "  quenelles, 169.
        "  Madeira sauce, etc., 169.
      en bellevue, 170.
    ribs, 170.
      with mushrooms, etc., 171.
    steaks, 171.
      broiled, 172.
    steaks with potatoes, 172.
          "     water-cress, etc., 173.
          "     mushrooms, 173.
          "     truffles, 173.
      sautes, 171.
      fancy, 173.
    tenderloin, 168.
    low cuts, 171.
    boiled or cold, 174.
      hashed, 177.
      in croquettes, 175.
      "  miroton, 176.
      "  salad, 177.
      au gratin, 176.
      with vegetables, etc., 175.
    corned, 177.
    en bellevue, 178.
    brain, 179.
    heart, 179.
    kidneys, 180.
    liver, 180.
    tail, 181.
    tongue, 178.
      (smoked), 183.
      with sauces, 183.
      in hors-d'oeuvre, 183.
      "  bellevue, 183.
    tripe, 181.
      broiled, 182.
      poulette, 182.
      stewed, 182.
      pickled, 183.
  Beets, 17.
    boiled, 17.
    pickled, 353.
    stewed, 312.
    in salad, 350.
  Beignets souffles, 422.
  Berries, iced, 398.
    preserved, 402.
    with milk, 401.
      "  liquor, 401.
    in salad, 352.
  Bichof, 45.
  Bills of fare, 459.
  Birds, 278, 279.
    preserved, 46.
  Biscottes, 448.
  Biscuits, 426.
    almonds, 426.
    chocolate, 426.
    glazed, 426.
    with filberts, etc., 427.
    vanilla, 426.
    of Rheims, 427.
  Blackberries, 352.
    in compote, 386.
    "  jelly, 406.
    preserved, 402.
  Black-birds, 278.
  Black-fish, 132, 135.
  Blanc-mange, 380.
  Blanc-manger, 381.
  Blanch, 305.
  Blanquette, 205.
  Blue-fish, 132, 135.
  Bobolink, 278.
  Boiling, 9.
  Boned turkey, 260.
  Border of paste, 244.
        "   rice, 373.
  Bouchees, 420.
    of fish, 421.
    "  birds, 421.
    "  oysters, 421.
    "  lobster, etc., 421.
  Boulettes, 117.
  Bouquet, 461.
  Brain, 214.
  Braising, 18.
  Bread, 454-458.
    crumbs, 46.
    farce, 113.
    pudding, 445.
  Breakfast, 453.
  Brioche, 449.
  Broccoli, 318.
  Broiling, 10.
  Broth, 61-70.
  Brown-butter, 100.
  Buffalo, 277.
    steaks, 277.
  Buckwheat cakes, 431.
  Bunch of seasonings, 18.
  Burnt sugar, 47.
  Butter, 409.
    anchovy, 99.
    lobster, etc., 118, 119.
    melted, 119.
    scented, 119.
  Buttered paper, 18.

  Cabbage, 313.
    a la creme, 313.
    with apples, 313.
     "   bacon, 313.
    garniture, 113.
    in salad, 348.
    "  sour-krout, 315.
    stewed, 313.
    stuffed, 314.
    pickled, 353.
    red, 314.
  Cabinet pudding, 445.
  Cafe au lait, 51.
    noir, 51.
  Cake, 428.
    almond, 428.
    apple, 429.
    corn, 431.
    cream, 423.
    currant, 428.
    filbert, 428.
    fourre, 428.
    hazel-nut, etc., 428.
    hard, 429.
    heavy, 429.
    Madeleine, 452.
    Milanais, 429.
    Nantais, 428.
    Pithiviers, 415.
    plum, 433.
    pound, 432.
    rice, 373.
    Saint Honore, 423.
    Savarin, 430.
    short, 432.
    sponge, 431.
    tea, 433.
    Viennois, 433.
    with jelly, 433.
  Calf's brain, 214.
    ears, 215.
    feet, 215.
      " jelly, 53.
    head, 216, 217.
      en tortue, 218.
      soup, 86.
    heart, 218.
    kidneys, 219.
    lights, 220.
    liver, 221.
    pluck, 222.
    sweetbreads, 223.
      in vol-au-vent, 419.
    tail, 223.
    tongue, 223.
  Candied fruit, 403.
  Capon, 256.
  Caramel, 47.
  Cardoon, 316.
  Carp, 132, 135.
  Carrots, 316.
    Bechamel, 316.
    fines herbes, 317.
    glazed, 317.
    au jus, 317.
    poulette, 317.
    stewed, 317.
    with sugar, 318.
    in puree, 122.
     " soup, 77.
  Catsup, 18.
    mushroom, 327.
    tomato, 354.
  Cauliflowers, 318.
    Bechamel, 318.
    gratin, 318.
    white sauce, 319.
    fried, 319.
    stewed, 319.
    in salad, 320.
    with cream, etc., 319.
    pickled, 353.
  Caviare, 18.
  Celery, 320.
    fried, 320.
    in salad, 348, 349.
     " puree, 122.
  Cervelas, 19.
  Charlotte of fruit, 383.
    Francaise, 382.
    Polonaise, 382.
    Russe, 381.
    Italienne, 382.
    a la Chantilly, 382.
    apple, 379.
  Chartreuse, 284.
  Cheese, 19.
    a la creme, 383.
  Cherries in brandy, 406.
    compote, 386.
    pie, 440.
    glazed, 396.
    preserved, 402.
  Chervil, 19.
  Chestnuts, 350.
    candied, 405.
    glazed, 396.
    in compote, 387.
     " puree, 121.
  Chiccory, 320.
    in salad, 348.
    (wild), 348.
  Chicken, 238.
    to truss, etc., 238-241.
    baked, 251.
    boiled, 241.
    boned, 242.
    broiled, 242.
    with sauce, 242, 243.
    croquettes, 243.
    fricassee, 244.
    supreme, 246, 247.
    financiere, 246.
    francaise, etc., 246.
    Marengo, etc., 248.
    roasted, 249.
    with sauce, 250.
      "  garniture, 250.
    decorated, 250, 251.
    saute, 251, 252.
    with Champagne, 252.
    stewed, 253.
    stuffed, 253, 254.
    in pie,
     " puree, 119.
    vol-au-vent, 419.
    cold, 254.
      in salad, 256.
    preserved, 46.
    broth, 65.
  Choca, 52.
  Chocolate, 51.
    iced, 398.
  Choux, 423.
  Chowder, 159.
  Clams, 159.
    baked, 161.
    chowder, 159.
    soup, 92.
  Cochineal, 19.
  Cocoa, 52.
  Cocoa-nut, 352.
  Cod-fish, 136.
    stuffed, 131.
    (salt), 145, 146.
  Coffee, 47.
    iced, 398.
  Colander, 19.
  Cold weather, 22.
  Colored beans, 310.
  Compotes, 384.
    apples, 385.
    cherries, 386.
    oranges, 386.
    berries, 386.
    peaches, etc., 385.
    syrup, 384.
  Contents, 7.
  Cooking, 9.
  Corn (sweet), 321.
   cake, 431.
  Corn-salad, 348.
  Corn-starch, 75.
  Consomme, 64.
  Caulis of fish, 101.
    veal, 101.
  Courses, 460.
  Crabs, 153.
  Cranberries, 387.
    compote, 387.
    pie, 441.
  Craw-fish, 153.
  Cream, 387.
    sweet, 392.
    cheese, 383.
    au cafe, 388.
    Chantilly, 392.
    caramel, 389.
    chocolate, 389.
    cuite, 390.
    essence, 390.
    frangipane, 390.
    ice, 392.
    legere, 391.
    lemon, 387.
    orange 390.
    patissiere, 391.
    renversee, 391.
    tea, 390.
    vanilla, 390.
    whipped, 392.
    cakes, 423.
  Croque en bouche, 394.
  Croquettes of veal, etc., 206.
    chicken, 243.
    potato, 338.
    rice, 373.
  Croquignolles, 450.
  Croutons, 114.
  Crullers, 431.
  Crumbs, 30, 46.
    white, 46.
  Cucumbers, 321.
    in hors-d'oeuvre, 322.
    pickled, 355.
    in salad, 350.
    stuffed, 322.
  Currants,
    compote, 386.
    glazed, 397.
    iced, 398.
    jelly, 406.
    salad, 352.
    (dried), 57.
  Curry, 20.
  Custard, 393.

  Dandelion, 323.
    in salad, 348.
  Dessert, 463.
  Dining-room, 20.
  Dinner, 459.
    directions, 16.
  Dish, 20.
  Dishes (order of), 461.
  Divers receipts, 44.
  Doughnuts, 432.
  Draining, 20.
  Drinking, 21.
  Duck, 264.
    apple sauce, 265.
    cranberry sauce, 265.
    baked, 265.
    roasted, 265.
    with turnips, 267.
      "  currant-jelly, 265.
      "  garniture, 265.
    saute, 266.
    with peas, etc., 266.
    stuffed, 268.
    boned, 268.
    preserved, 46.
    cold in salmis, 268.
        "   croquettes, 268.
        "   salad, 268.
  Duckling, 264.
  Dust, to, 21.

  Ears, 215.
  Eclairs, 424.
    au cafe, 425.
     " chocolate, 424.
     " tea, 425.
     " vanilla, 425.
     " currants, 425.
     " strawberries, 425.
     " jellies, 426.
     " essence, 425.
  Economy, 23.
  Eels, 136.
    broiled, 136.
    fried, 137.
    roasted, 137.
    in matelote, 137.
    stuffed, 137.
    in vol-au-vent, 419.
  Eggs, 356.
    beater, 24.
    crumbs to fry, 30.
    whites (to beat), 363.
    Bechamel, 357.
    boiled, 359.
    fried, 360.
    au gratin, 358.
    a la tripe, 362.
     "   neige, 362.
    poached, 362.
    scrambled, 360.
    stuffed, 358.
    Lyonnaise, 357.
    sur le plat, etc., 360.
    in matelote, 361.
    fricassee, 357.
    with vegetables, 359, 361.
      "  cheese, 357, 358.
      "  ham, etc., 359.
      "  fines herbes, 357.
      "  sauces, 358.
    garniture, 115.
    in salad, 350.
    Egg-plant, 323.
    Endive, 320.
    in salad, 348.
  Entrees, 462.
  Entremets, 463.
  Epigramme, 199.
  Errors in cooking, 24.
  Escalops, 158, 206.
  Essence of beef, 52.
    spinach, 52.

  Fanchonnettes, 416.
  Fans, 416.
  Farces, 113.
    bread, 113.
    cabbage, 113.
    combs, 113.
    croutons, 114.
    duxelle, 114.
    egg, 115.
    financiere, 115.
    liver, 115.
    Macedoine, 115.
    mushroom, 116.
    onion, 116.
    quenelles, 116.
    salpicon, 117.
    truffles, 117.
  Fat (chicken, etc.), 29.
    to clarify, 29.
    for frying, 29.
  Fecula, 76.
  Fennel, 25.
  Feuilletes, 413.
    a la Conde, 414.
  Figs, 25.
  Fillet, 168.
  Fines herbes, 25.
  Fish, 125.
    to keep, 33.
    quality, 35.
    to select, 125.
     " clean for boiling, 125.
     "      "    baking, etc., 125.
    same species, 125.
    to know when cooked enough, 126.
     " improve, 126.
     " bone, 126.
     " skin, 126.
     " decorate, 127.
    kettle, 127.
    baked, 128.
    balls, 128.
    boiled, 129.
    broiled, 129.
    cold, 144.
    fried, 129.
    a la Orly, 130.
    roasted, 130.
    saute, 131.
    stewed, 131.
    stuffed, 131.
    a la creme, 136.
    anchovy butter, 129.
       "    sauce, 135, 136.
    Bechamel, 136.
    Bordelaise, 143.
    Bretonne, 135.
    caper-sauce, 130, 135, 136.
    court-bouillon, 135.
    cream-sauce, 136.
    egg-sauce, 136.
    fines-herbes sauce, 136.
    genevoise-sauce, 135.
    genoise-sauce, 135.
    gratin-sauce, 132, 135.
    Hollandaise sauce, 130, 135, 136.
    Italienne sauce, 135.
    Maitre d'hotel sauce, 129, 136.
    matelote sauce, 132, 135.
    Mayonnaise, 130.
    piquante, 130.
    poivrade, 130.
    remolade, 130.
    Tartar, 135.
    tomato, 130, 135, 136.
    vinaigrette, 134-136.
    bass, 130, 132.
    black-fish, 130, 132.
    blue-fish, 130, 132.
    cod, 136.
     " (salt), 145.
    eels, 132, 136.
    flounder, 130, 137.
    haddock, 136.
    halibut, 136.
    herring, 130.
     " (salt), 147.
    mackerel, 135.
     "   (salt), 148.
    pike, 130, 132, 139.
    porgy, 130, 132.
    ray, 139.
    salmon, 140.
    shad, 142.
    sheep's-head, 142.
    skate, 139.
    trout, 132, 139.
    turbot, 143, 144.
    white-fish, 130.
    clams, 159.
    lobster, 149, 153.
    oysters, 155.
    floating island, 362.
      Allemande sauce, 137.
      baked, 137.
      Normande, 137.
       "   another, 138.
      boned and fried, 139.
  Flour, 25.
  Foies-gras, 25.
  Fondue, 362.
  Food, 22.
  Fox, 297.
  Frangipane, 390.
  Fricandeau, 211.
  Fritters, 393.
  Frogs, 149.
  Fromage a la creme, 383.
  Fruit, 406.
    corer, 26.
    candied, 403.
    glazed, 394.
    iced, 397.
    for dessert, 401.
    preserved, 353.
     "   in liquor, 405.
  Frying, 11.
    batter for, 30.
    fat     " 29.
    lard    " 28.
    directions for, 11.
    eggs and crumbs for, 30.

  Galantine, 26.
  Galette, 416, 450.
    du gymnase, 416.
  Game, 276.
    pie, 434.
  Garlic, 25.
  Garnish, 113.
  Garnishing, 113.
  Garnitures, 113.
  Genoise, 450.
    with almonds, etc., 451.
     "   chocolate, etc., 451.
  Gibelotte, 293.
  Giblets, 273.
  Glazing, 26.
  Godiveau, 117.
  Goose, 268.
    apple-sauce, etc., 268.
  Gooseberries in jelly, 386.
  Gosling, 268.
  Grapes, 402.
    in jelly, 406.
    glazed, 397.
  Gravy of meat, 55.
    fish, 101.
  Grouse, 280.
  Guinea-fowl, 268.

  Haddock, 136.
  Halibut, 136.
  Ham, 228.
    boiled, 228.
    in hors-d'oeuvre, 228.
    with puree, 229.
    decorated, 230.
    roasted, 229.
    with sauces, 230, 231.
  Hard cake, 429.
  Hare, 280-282.
  Hazel-nut butter, 119.
  Head-cheese, 234.
  Herb broth, 91.
  Herring, 130.
    salt, 147.
    red, 148.
  Highholders, 279.
  Hominy, 324.
  Hors-d'oeuvres, 462.
  Horse-radish, 462.
  Hot weather, 21.

  Ice-cream, 392.
  Iced fruit, 397.
  Icing, 53.
  Ignorance in cooking, 24.
  Indigestion, 26.
  Isinglass, 26.
  Italian pastes, 26.

  Jam, 384.
  Jellies, 53, 398.
    sweet or wine, 398.
    Macedoine, 399.
    cold, 399.
    meat, 53.
    broth, 53.
    chicken, 53.
    turkey, 53.
    calf's-foot, 53.
    fruit, 406.
  Jelly-bag, 27.
  Juice or jus, 55.
  Julienne, 73, 74.

  Kid, 201.
  Kitchen utensils, 27.
  Kisses, 452.

  Lady's-fingers, 427.
  Lait de poule, 28.
  Lamb, 198.
    epigramme, 199.
    fore-quarter, 198.
    hind-quarter, 199.
    entire, 200.
    cold, 200.
    feet, 201.
    kidneys, 201.
  Lapwing, 279.
  Lard, 28.
  Larding, 31.
    needle, 31.
  Leaven, 32.
  Leeks, 324.
  Lemon in compote, 386.
    iced, 398.
    pie, 441.
  Lemonade, 44.
  Lentils, 324.
    puree, 120.
    soup, 81.
  Lettuce, 324.
    in salad, 348.
  Lima beans, 309.
  Liver, 115.
  Lobster, 149.
    to boil, 150.
    bisque, 70.
    croquettes, 152.
    butter, 118.
    fried, 152.
      another, 152.
    in bouchees, 420
     "  vol-au-vent, 419.
     "  pie, 439.
     "  salad, 151.
         another, 151.
     "  the shell, 150.
    scalloped, 152.
  Loin, 213.
  Lunch, 464.

  Macaroni, 370.
    croquettes, 372.
    au gratin, 370.
    Italienne, 371.
    Napolitaine, 371.
    potage, 77.
  Macaroons, 451.
    with chocolate, 451.
  Macedoine jelly, 399.
    salad, 352.
    omelet, 369.
    garniture, 115.
  Mackerel, 135.
    salt, 148.
    Spanish, 135.
  Madeleines, 452.
  Marmalades, 401.
  Matelote, 132-134.
  Meadow-lark, 279.
  Meat, 35
    to cook, 32.
     " keep, 33.
    pies, 433.
    jellies, 53.
    gravy, 55.
  Melons, 55.
    iced, 398.
    melted butter, 119.
  Meringues, 452.
    apple, 379.
    Chantilly, 453.
    Swiss, 453.
  Meuniere, 56.
  Mince-pie, 441.
  Mint, 56.
  Miroton, 176.
  Mixing, 12.
  Mock-turtle soup, 86.
  Motto, 43.
  Moulds, 34.
  Muffins, 432.
  Mulberries, 386, 406.
  Muscles, 153, 154.
  Mushrooms, 325, 327.
    broiled, 326.
    puree, 123.
    catsup, 337.
    garniture, 116.
  Mustard, 348.
  Mutton, 184.
    baked, 185.
    roasted, 184.
      decorated, 185.
      with vegetables, 185.
    haricot, 186.
    breast broiled, 186.
      with sauces, 187.
      on purees, 187.
    chops, broiled, 187.
      with vegetables, 188.
      in papillotes, 188.
      with sauces, 188.
      sautees, etc., 187.
    leg, 190.
      boiled, 192.
      decorated, 191.
      with vegetables, 190.
        "  currant-jelly, 190.
        "  sauces, 190, 191.
      stewed, 191.
      cold, 192.
      baked, 190.
      roasted, 190.
      with puree, 190.
    neck, 187.
    saddle, 193.
      baked, 193.
      roasted, etc., 193.
    shoulder, 192.
      boiled, 193.
      boned, 192.
      stuffed, 192.
      on purees, 192.
      roasted, 192.
      with sauces, 193.
    cold, in vinaigrette, 193, 194.
         "   croquettes, 186.
    brain, etc., 194.

  Nasturtium, 350.
  Nougat, 453.
  Nouilles, 375.

  Oil, 347.
  Oiled paper, 18.
  Okra, 88.
  Olives, 34.
  Omelet, 363, 364.
    Celestine, 366.
    Macedoine, 369.
    soufflee, 369.
    aux fines herbes, 366.
    au naturel, 366.
    with bacon, 366.
      "  fruit, 365.
      "  cheese, 367.
      "  ham, etc., 368.
      "  kidneys, 367.
      "  lobster, 367.
      "  mushrooms, 367.
      "  oysters and fish, 370.
      "  rum, 368.
      "  sorrel, 367.
      "  sugar, 367.
      "  sweetmeats, 370.
      "  vegetables, 366.
  Onions, 327.
    glazed, 328.
    in puree, 123.
     " garniture, 116.
     " salad, 351.
    pickled, 353.
  Opossum, 297.
  Orangeade, 44.
  Oranges, compote, 386.
    glazed, 394.
    iced, 398.
    preserved, 405.
    salad, 352.
    pie, 440.
  Order of dishes, 461.
  Osmazome, 34.
  Otter, 297.
  Oysters, 155.
    raw, 155.
    in bouchees, 421.
     " patties, 421.
     " vol-au-vent, 419.
     " poulette, 158.
    broiled, 157.
    fried, 156.
    roasted, 157.
    stewed, 158.
    scalloped, 157.
    a la Washington, 158.
    pickled, 158.
    soup, 90.
  Oyster-plant, 342.

  Pain perdu, 394.
  Pains of game, 438.
  Panade, 56.
  Pancakes, 431, 454.
  Pap, 56.
  Paper, buttered, 18.
    oiled, 18.
  Papillotes, 210.
  Parsley, 35.
  Parsnip, 328.
    saute, 328.
    stewed, 329.
  Partridge, 282.
  Paste, 410.
    puff, 410-413.
    for meat-pies, 434.
  Pastry, 408.
    bag, 36.
  Pate a choux, 422.
  Pate, 433.
    de foies-gras, 25.
  Patties (bouchees), 420.
  Peacock, 282.
  Peaches, baked, 401.
    in compote, 385.
     " jelly, 406.
     " pie, 440.
     " salad, 352.
     iced, 397.
     preserved, 401.
     candied, 403.
  Pears, in compote, 386.
        "   salad, 352.
    candied, 404.
    glazed, 396.
    iced, 397.
    preserved, 402.
    syrup, 380.
  Peas (green), 329.
    boiled, 329.
    au jus, 330.
    with ham, etc., 330.
      "  sugar, 330.
    in puree, 121.
    (canned), 330.
    (dry), 330.
    (split), 330.
    in soup, 80.
    preserved, 354.
  Pepper, 35.
  Perch, 132, 135.
  Petits fours, 410.
    pains, 426.
      au chocolat, etc., 424.
  Pheasant, 282.
  Pickerel, 139.
  Pickled cucumber, 355.
  Pickles, 353.
  Pies, 433.
    decorated, 435.
    fruit, 440.
    meat, 437.
    fish, 439.
    game, 436.
    mince, 441.
    pot, 442.
  Pig's feet, 232.
    head, 233.
    kidneys, 234.
    (sucking), 235, 236.
    tongue, 234.
  Pigeons, 269.
    baked, 271.
    broiled, 269.
    fried, 272.
    roasted, 270.
    stewed, 270.
    stuffed, 270.
    in chartreuse, 269.
     " compote, 272.
     " crapaudine, 273.
    with vegetables, 269.
    pie, 436.
  Pike, 139.
    genoise sauce, 139.
    with different sauces, 135, 136.
    in matelote, 132-134.
    roasted, 130.
  Pine-apple, 352.
    glazed, 397.
    iced, 398.
    in compote, 386.
     " fritters, 393.
    syrup, 380.
  Pithiviers, 415.
  Plover, 279.
  Plums, 402.
    candied, 404.
    glazed, 397.
    iced, 397.
    in jelly, 406.
     " marmalade, 386.
     " pie, 440.
  Plum-pudding, 447.
  Poached eggs, 362.
  Pommees, 414.
  Porgy, 132, 135.
  Pork, 226.
    chine, 226.
    cutlets, 227.
    leg, 228.
    salt, 231.
    ham, 228.
    ears, etc., 232.
  Porte manteau, 414.
  Potages, 61.
    broth for, 62.
    chicken broth, etc., 65.
    veal, 68.
    vegetables, 69.
    fish, 65.
    made quickly, 70.
    bisque of lobster, 70.
          "   crabs, 72.
          "   craw-fish, 72.
    bouillabaisse, 72.
    consomme, 64.
    Colbert, 73.
    fancy, 77.
    Julienne, 73, 74.
    a la Brunoise, 74.
       Monaco, 74.
       regence, 75.
       royale, 75.
    au chasseur, 86.
    Chinese, 83.
    printanier, 75.
    veloute, 75.
    with arrow-root, 75.
      "  barley, 76.
      "  bread, 75.
      "  corn-starch, 75.
      "  carrots, 77.
      "  fecula, 76.
      "  gruel, 76.
      "  giblets, 76.
      "  Indian meal, 76.
      "  Italian pastes, 78.
      "  macaroni, 77-79.
      "  mackerel, 77.
      "  nouilles, 79.
      "  potatoes, 79.
      "  quenelles, 80.
      "  rice, 80.
      "  sago, 76.
      "  semoule, 76.
      "  tapioca, 76.
      "  turnips, 80.
      "  vermicelli, 77.
    puree Chantilly, 81.
     " a la Conde, 82.
       "  " Crecy, 82.
       "  " francaise, 81.
       "  " reine, 84-85.
       " of asparagus, 82.
       "  " artichokes, 82.
       "  " beans, 81.
       "  " cauliflowers, 82.
       "  " chestnuts, 82.
       "  " corn 83.
       "  " lentils, 81.
       "  " Lima, 81.
       "  " peas, 80.
       "  " potatoes, 81.
       "  " pumpkins, 81.
       "  " squash, 82.
       "  " tomatoes, 83, 84.
       "  " turnips, 82.
       "  " wheat, 82.
       "  " fowls, 85.
    Soup maigre, 85.
      mock-turtle, 86.
      sportsman's, 86.
      turtle, 87.
      clam, 92.
      rice, 88.
      beef and mutton, 86.
      muscle, 92.
      okra, 88.
      ox-cheek, 89.
       " tail, 89.
      oyster, 90.
      pot-au-feu, 61.
      sheep's-tail, 89.
      sorrel, 89.
      with cabbage, 90.
        "  cauliflower, 91.
        "  cheese, 91.
        "  herbs, 91.
        "  leeks, 92.
        "  milk, 91.
        "  onions, 88.
      Allemande, 92, 93.
      Indian, 93.
      Polish, 93.
      Russian, 94.
      Spanish, 95, 96.
  Potatoes, 330.
    boiled, 331.
    steamed, 331.
    Allemande, 332.
    Anglaise, 332.
    Barigoule, 332.
    Bechamel, 332.
    broiled, 332.
    duchesse, 339.
    francaise, 333.
    fried, 332.
    Hollandaise, 333.
    Lyonnaise, 334.
    Maitre d'hotel, 334.
    mashed, 335.
    Parisienne, 332.
    Polonaise, 335.
    sautees, 336.
    soufflees, 336.
    stuffed, 337.
    swelled, 333.
    in balls, 333, 338.
     " cakes, 338.
     " croquettes, 338.
     " matelote, 339.
     " provencale, 336.
     " puree, 121.
    salad, 351.
    with bacon, 339.
      "  butter, 339.
      "  cream, etc., 340.
    soup, 81.
    sweet, 340.
  Pot-au-feu, 61.
  Poultry, 237.
  Pound cake, 432.
  Prairie hen, 282.
    baked, 282.
    boned, 288.
    broiled, 283.
    preserved, 46.
    roasted, 286.
    saute, 287.
    stewed, 287.
    with sauces, 287.
      "  vegetables, 283, 284.
      "  currant-jelly, 287.
      "  garnitures, 287.
      "  mushrooms, 287.
      "  oranges, 287.
    hunter-like, 287.
    larded, 284.
    in chartreuse, 284
     " crapaudine, 287.
     " croquettes, 288.
     " fricassee, 287.
     " pie, 436.
     " puree, 119.
     " salad, 288.
     " salmis, 288.
     " terreen, 438.
  Prawns, 154.
  Preface, 3.
  Preserves of berries, 402.
    of fruits, 401.
     " meat, 46.
     " vegetables, 353.
  Prunes, 401.
    glazed, 397.
    pie, 440.
  Puddings, 442.
    bread, 445.
    cabinet, 445.
    macaroni, 447.
    plum, 447.
    tapioca, etc., 447.
    vermicelli, 446.
    sauces, 111.
  Puff-paste, 410-413.
  Pumpkins, 340.
  Punch, 407.
    Roman, 408, 463.
  Purees, of fruits,
         "   vegetables, 120-124.
         "   meat, 119.
  Purslain, 340.

  Quail, 288.
    baked, 288.
    roasted, 289.
      vegetables, 290.
    in chartreuse, 290.
     " pie, 436.
    hunter-like, 289.
    preserved, 46.
    in grape-vine leaves, 290.
  Quality of fish, 35.
    of meat, etc., 35.
  Quenelles, 117.
  Quinces, preserved, 402.
    in marmalade, 387.
     " jelly, 406.

  Rabbit, 200.
    baked, 291.
    larded, 291.
    roasted, 293.
    saute, 294.
    stewed, 294.
    in chartreuse, 291.
     " civet, 291.
     " croquettes, 292.
     " gibelotte, 293.
     " Marengo, 293.
     " pie, 436.
     " vol-au-vent, 420.
    with olives, 293.
      "  peas, 294.
      "  currant-jelly, 292.
      "  sauces, 291, 294.
     sportsman-like, 294.
     cold, 295.
  Raccoon, 297.
  Radishes, 341.
  Rail, 279.
  Raisine, 402.
  Raisins, 57.
  Raspberries, compote, 386.
    jelly, 406.
  Raw materials, 36.
  Ray, 139.
    au beurre noir, 140.
  Red herring, 148.
  Reed-bird, 279.
  Releves, 462.
  Rhubarb, 341.
    pie, 441.
  Rice, 372.
    in border, 373.
    cake, 373.
    croquettes, 373.
    fritters, 374.
    souffle, 374.
    soup, 80.
    water, 375.
    with fruit, 374.
  Rice-bird, 279.
  Rissoles, 416.
  Roasting, 12.
  Robins, 279.
  Rolls, 458.
  Roman punch, 408.
  Rots, 463.
  Roux, 109.
  Rum cakes, 430.

  Sage, 35.
  Sago, 76.
  Saint-Honore, 423.
  Salads, 347.
    of greens, 348.
     " fruits, 352.
    of poultry, 256.
     " game, 288.
     " fish, 352.
  Salmis, 296.
  Salmon, 140.
    broiled, 142.
    in fricandeau, 140.
     " Genevoise, 141.
     " hors-d'oeuvre, 352.
     " papillotes, 140.
     " pie, 439.
     " salad, 141.
     " scallops, 141.
    caper-sauce, 136.
    court bouillon, 140.
    maitre d'hotel, 140.
    roasted, 130.
    salt, 146, 147.
    smoked, 147.
  Salpicon, 117.
  Salsify, 342.
    Bechamel, etc., 342.
  Sandwiches, 57.
  Sardines, 145.
  Sauce, 97.
    Allemande, 98.
    anchovy, 99.
    apple, 99.
    Bechamel, 99.
    blonde, 100.
    bread, 100.
    brown, 100.
    caper, 100.
    celery, 100.
    Champagne, 105.
    Colbert, 100.
    coulis, 101.
    cranberry, 99.
    cream, 102.
    craw-fish, 105.
    cucumber, 102.
    currant, 99.
    diplomat, 102.
    egg, 102.
    Espagnolle 102.
    essence, 103.
    fines herbes, 103.
    fish, 103.
    Genevoise, 141.
    Genoise, 103.
    gravy, 55.
    Hollandaise, 104.
    Indian, 104.
    Italian, 104.
    juice, 55.
    lobster, 105.
    Madeira, 105.
    maitre d'hotel, 105.
    matelote, 132, 133.
    Mayonnaise, 105.
    muscle, 111.
    mushroom, 106.
    oyster, 111.
    Parisienne, 106.
    peach, 99.
    piquante, 106.
    poivrade, 107.
    Polonaise, 107.
    poulette, 107.
    prawn, 105.
    princesse, 108.
    provencale, 108.
    ravigote, 108.
    raspberry, 99.
    remolade, 109.
    Robert, 108.
    roux, 109.
    shallot, 109.
    shrimp, 105.
    soubise, 109.
    supreme, 109.
    tarragon, 118.
    Tartar, 106.
    tomato, 110.
    truffle, 110.
    veloute, 110.
    white, 111.
    vinaigrette, 110.
    for blanc mange, 381.
     "  puddings, 111, 112.
     "  Savarin, 430.
  Saucissons, 19.
  Sausages, 19.
  Sausage-meat, 57.
  Sauteing, 13.
  Savarin, 430.
  Scallops, 158.
    on the shell, 159.
    of salmon, 141.
     " veal, 206.
  Scalloped-knife, 36.
  Seasoning, 14.
  Semoule, 76.
  Shad, 142.
    broiled, 142.
    a la Chambord, 142.
    au gratin, 142.
    in provencale, 142.
    with sorrel, 142.
    stuffed, 137.
    roasted, 130.
  Shallots, 37.
  Sheep's brain, 194.
    feet, 194.
    kidneys, 196.
    tongue, 197.
  Sheep's-head fish, 142, 143.
  Short-cake, 432.
  Shrimps, 154.
  Simmering, 14.
  Skate, 139.
  Skewers, 37.
  Skirret, 342.
  Skunk, 298.
  Small birds, 278, 279.
  Small fish, 126.
  Smelts, 129.
  Smoked tongue, 183.
  Snails, 303.
  Snipe, 279, 295.
  Sole, 137.
  Sorrel, 342.
    au jus, 343.
    in puree, 343.
     " salad, 350.
     " soup, 89.
    preserved, 343.
  Souffles, 400.
  Soups, 61.
  Sour-krout, 315.
  Souse, 58.
  Spanish mackerel, 135.
  Sparrow-grass, 307.
  Spices, 38.
  Spinach, 343.
    au beurre, etc., 345.
     " jus, 344.
     " sucre, 344.
    a la creme, 344.
    essence, 52.
  Sponge cake, 431.
  Sportsman's soup, 86.
  Sprats, 145.
  Sprouts, 345.
  Squash, 340.
  Squirrel, 299.
  Steaks, 171.
    turtle, 88.
  Sterlet, 143.
  Stewing, 14.
  Stirring, 39.
  Straining, 39.
  Strawberry, glazed, 396.
    iced, 398.
    in compote, 386.
     " fritters, 393.
     " jelly, 406.
     " salad, 352.
     " short-cake, 432.
  Stuffing of birds, 253.
    fish, 131.
  Sturgeon, 140.
  Succory, 320.
  Succotash, 321.
  Sucking-pig, 235.
    baked, 235.
    boned, 236.
    roasted, 235.
    decorated, 236.
  Sugar, 39, 376.
    burnt, 47.
    cooked, 376.
    dusted, 21.
    pulverized, 39.
    syrup, 376.
  Sun-fish, 132.
  Supper, 464.
  Syrup for compotes, 384.
    sugar, 376.
    apple, 380.
  Sweetbreads, 223.
  Sweet dishes, 376.
    potatoes, 340.

  Tapioca, 447.
  Tarragon, 40.
  Tarte, 441.
  Tartelettes, 414.
  Tasting, 14.
  Tea, 58.
    cake, 433.
    (meal), 464.
  Tench, 132.
  Tenderloin, 168.
  Terrapin, 87.
  Terreen, 438.
  Thrush, 279.
  Thermometer, 410.
  Thyme, 35.
  Tin tubes, 40.
  Toasts, 59.
  Tomatoes, 345.
    salad, 351.
    stuffed, 345.
    stewed, 345.
    preserved, 354.
    catsup, 354.
  Tongue, 178.
  Tripe, 181.
  Trout, 139.
    genoise sauce, 139.
    in matelote, 132-134.
    with sauces, 135, 136.
  Troutlet, 139.
  Truffles, 40.
    garniture, 117.
  Tunny, 143, 147.
  Turbot, 143, 144.
    Bordelaise, 143.
    in salad, 144.
     " vol-au-vent, 419.
     " pie, 439.
    roasted, 130.
    cold, 144.
    in hors-d'oeuvre, 352.
  Turkey, 257.
    baked, 258.
    boiled, 257.
    boned, 260.
    preserved, 46.
    roasted, 258.
    stewed, 259.
    stuffed, 259, 260.
    in croquettes, 264.
     " pie, 437.
     " salad, 264.
    with cranberry-sauce, 259.
      "  oyster-sauce, 259.
      "  currant-jelly, 259.
    cold, 263.
    caponed, 264.
  Turnips, 346.
    Bechamel, etc., 346.
    glazed, 346.
    au jus, 346.
    with sugar, 346.
  Turtle, 87.

  Vanilla, 41.
  Veal, 202.
    baked, 205.
    blanquette, 205.
    broiled, 208.
    broth, 68.
    croquettes, 206.
    ragout, 206.
    roasted, 203.
    in scallops, 206.
     " vol-au-vent, 420.
    with vegetables, 204.
    decorated, 204.
    breast, with peas, 207.
      in matelote, 208.
      stewed, 207.
    neck, 206.
    cold, 214.
    cutlets, 208.
      baked, 209.
      sautees, 209.
      with sauces, 210.
        "  garnitures, 209.
      in papillotes, 210.
      with mushrooms, 209.
      en Bellevue, 210.
    fricandeau, 211.
      au jus, 211.
      financiere, 211.
      with peas, etc., 211.
    loin, or leg, stewed, 213.
      baked, 205.
      roasted, 203.
      decorated, 204.
    shoulder, on purees, etc., 212.
      baked, 212.
      boned, 212.
      roasted, 212.
      stuffed, 212.
      en Bellevue, 213.
    brain, etc., 214.
      pie, 437.
  Vegetables, 305.
    spoons, 41.
  Venison, 299.
    baked, 300.
    in civet, 300.
    cutlets, 300.
      with sauces, 301.
    haunch, 301.
    saddle, with currant-jelly, 302.
    shoulder, 302.
      stewed, 302.
      with truffles, etc., 303.
    cold, 303.
  Vermicelli, 77, 446.
  Vinegar, 347.
  Vol-au-vent, 417.
    of fish, 419.
     " oysters, 419.
     " chicken, 419.
     " veal, 420.
     " game, 420.
     " fruits, 420.
     " sweatmeats, 420.

  Waffles, 454.
  Walnuts, 351.
  Water, 42.
  Watercress, 347, 349.
  Weak-fish, 132.
  Welsh rarebit, 60.
  White-fish, 140.
  White pepper, 35.
  Whortleberry, 386, 440.
  Wines, 42.
  Woodchuck, 297.
  Woodcock, 279.
    in pie, 436.
     " salmis, 296.
  Woodpecker, 279.

  Yellow-birds, 279.

  Zephyrs, 453.


  THE END.




  GASTRONOMY AND HOUSEKEEPING.

       *     *     *     *     *


    =Household Hints=: A Book of Home Receipts and Home Suggestions.
    By Mrs. Emma W. Babcock. Flexible cloth, with illuminated
    design. 12mo. 60 cents.

Contents: I. Introductory; II. Bread, Tea, and Coffee; III. Meats,
soups, and Fish; IV. Vegetables, Cereals, and Salads; V. Puddings and
Pies; VI. Pickles; VII. Cake, Custard, and Candy; VIII. Fruit; IX.
Miscellaneous Hints; X. Talks upon Various Subjects.


    =All Around the House=; or, How to make Homes happy. By Mrs. Henry
    Ward Beecher. 12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

This volume, as its title implies, consists of papers upon topics
concerning the ordering and well-being of the household. It contains, in
addition to a large number of receipts for cooking, and rules for
marketing, numerous hints for the management of servants and children,
directions as to furnishing, repairing, cleansing, etc., and information
on all the innumerable things on which housekeepers need information,
while, in addition to its usefulness as a guide to practical knowledge
and economical methods, it is eminently interesting and suggestive, in
its various essays on home topics, to every one concerned in the welfare
and happiness of the household.


    =Hand-book of Practical Cookery=, for Ladies and Professional
    Cooks. Containing the whole Science and Art of preparing Human
    Food. By P. BLOT. 12mo, cloth, $1.75.


    =Breakfast, Dinner, and Tea=; viewed Classically, Poetically, and
    Practically. A new edition. Square 12mo, cloth, $1.50.


    =Half-Tints=: Table d'Hote and Drawing-room. 12mo, cloth, 75
    cents.


    =Lessons in Cookery=: Hand-book of the National Training-School
    for Cookery, South Kensington, London; to which is added the
    Principles of Diet in Health and Disease, by Thomas K. Chambers,
    M. D. Edited by Eliza A. Youmans. 12mo, cloth, $1.50.

The novelty and merit of the work are in the method by which it secures
_successful_ practice. Its lessons, the plainest, easiest, and fullest,
anywhere to be found, have grown out of a long and painstaking
experience, in finding out the best plan of teaching beginners and
ignorant persons how to cook well. They were perfected through the
stupidities, blunders, mistakes, questionings, and difficulties, of
hundreds of pupils, of all ages, grades, and capacities, under the
careful direction of intelligent, practical teachers.


    =Hand-book of Dining=; or, Corpulency and Leanness Scientifically
    Considered. By Brillat Savarin. Translated by L. F. Simpson.
    12mo, $1.00.


    =Social Etiquette of New York=. New and enlarged edition.
    Containing two additional chapters--"Extended Visits," and
    "Customs and Costumes at Theatres, Concerts, and Operas"--with
    the chapter on "Etiquette of Weddings" rewritten in accordance
    with the latest fashionable usage. 18mo, cloth, gilt, $1.00.


    =Hand-book of Household Science=. By Professor E. L. Youmans.
    12mo, cloth, $1.75.

This work has been prepared to meet a long-acknowledged want in our
homes and schools. There is a strong and growing demand for that kind of
knowledge which can be made available in the daily operations of
familiar life. Various books have been prepared which cross the field of
domestic science at different points, but this is the first work that
traverses and occupies the whole ground. Hardly a page can be opened
that does not convey information interesting and valuable to every
person who dwells in a house. The work will be found not only of high
practical utility, but captivating to the student, and unequaled in the
interest of its recitations.

       *     *     *     *     *

New York: D. APPLETON & CO., 1, 3, & 5 Bond Street.




  BOOKS FOR EVERY HOUSEHOLD.

       *     *     *     *     *


    =Cooley's Cyclopaedia of Practical Receipts=, And Collateral
    Information in the Arts, Manufactures, Professions, and Trades,
    including Medicine, Pharmacy, and Domestic Economy. Designed as
    a Comprehensive Supplement to the Pharmacopoeia, and General
    Book of Reference for the Manufacturer, Tradesman, Amateur, and
    Heads of Families. _Sixth edition_. Revised and partly rewritten
    by Richard V. Tuson, Professor of Chemistry and Toxicology in
    the Royal Veterinary College. Complete in two volumes, 8vo,
    1,796 pages. With Illustrations. Price, $9.00.

"The great characteristic of this work is its general usefulness. In
covering such diverse subjects, the very best and most recent research
seems to have been sought for, and the work is remarkable for
intelligent industry. This very complete work can, then, be highly
recommended as fulfilling to the letter what it purports to be--a
cyclopaedia of practical receipts."--_New York Times_.

"It is a well-edited special work, compiled with excellent judgment for
special purposes, which are kept constantly in mind. If it is more
comprehensive than its title suggests, that is only because it is
impossible to define the limits of its purpose with exactitude, or to
describe its contents upon a title-page. Illustrations of the text are
freely used, and the mechanical execution of the work is
excellent."--_New York Evening Post._


  The Chemistry of Common Life.

    By the late Professor James F. W. Johnston. A new edition,
    revised and enlarged, and brought down to the Present Time, by
    Arthur Herbert Church, M. A., Oxon., author of "Food: its
    Sources, Constituents, and Uses." Illustrated with Maps and
    numerous Engravings on Wood. In one vol., 12mo, 592 pages.
    Cloth. Price, $2.00.

Summary of Contents.--The Air we Breathe; the Water we Drink; the Soil
we Cultivate; the Plant we Rear; the Bread we Eat; the Beef we Cook; the
Beverages we Infuse; the Sweets we Extract; the Liquors we Ferment; the
Narcotics we Indulge in; the Poisons we Select; the Odors we Enjoy; the
Smells we Dislike; the Colors we Admire; What we Breathe and Breathe
for; What, How, and Why we Digest; the Body we Cherish; the Circulation
of Matter.

In the number and variety of striking illustrations, in the simplicity
of its style, and in the closeness and cogency of its arguments,
Professor Johnston's "Chemistry of Common Life" has as yet found no
equal among the many books of a similar character which its success
originated, and it steadily maintains its preeminence in the popular
scientific literature of the day. In preparing this edition for the
press, the editor had the opportunity of consulting Professor Johnston's
private and corrected copy of "The Chemistry of Common Life," who had,
before his death, gleaned very many fresh details, so that he was able
not only to incorporate with his revision some really valuable matter,
but to learn the kind of addition which the author contemplated.

       *     *     *     *     *

  _D. APPLETON & CO., Publishers_, 1, 3, & 5 _Bond St., New York_


  =Transcriber's Notes:=
  hyphenation, spelling and grammar have been preserved as in the original
  Page 28, kept a ong time ==> kept a long time
  Page 29, to bake game ==> to bake game.
  Page 47, when proper y made ==> when properly made
  Page 53, with good beef ==> with good beef.
  Page 68, stalks of chewil ==> stalks of chervil
  Page 78, place a ayer ==> place a layer
  Page 83, when mash gently ==> then mash gently
  Page 86, but ess nourishing ==> but less nourishing
  Page 116, fresh mushroons and ==> fresh mushrooms and
  Page 116, cooked, when add ==> cooked, then add
  Page 157, excellent dish ==> excellent dish.
  Page 205, hrow them in ==> throw them in
  Page 218, with once ounce ==> with one ounce
  Page 248, cooked, when add ==> cooked, then add
  Page 253, yellow, when add ==> yellow, then add
  Page 284, done, when dish ==> done, then dish
  Page 297, following sauce pound ==> following sauce; pound
  Page 334, and scolloped all ==> and scalloped all
  Page 346, fifteen minutes ==> fifteen minutes.
  Page 361, Procced as for eggs ==> Proceed as for eggs
  Page 379, by squeezeing it ==> by squeezing it
  Page 394, an inck thick. ==> an inch thick.
  Page 400, tea, choco late, etc. ==> tea, chocolate, etc.
  Page 404, one another; and ==> one an other; and
  Page 416, with trim mings of ==> with trimmings of
  Page 418/419, the cen tre, it ==> the centre, it
  Page 443, atter are blamable ==> latter are blamable
  Page 460, rots and entremets ==> rots and entremets
  Page 460, to spend. etc. ==> to spend, etc.
  Page 461, Hors-d'oeuvres ==> hors-d'oeuvres
  Page 474, sautees, 336. ==> sautees, 336.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAND-BOOK OF PRACTICAL COOKERY, FOR LADIES AND PROFESSIONAL COOKS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Eureka Stockade
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Eureka Stockade

Author: Raffaello Carboni


        
Release date: November 1, 2002 [eBook #3546]
                Most recently updated: January 8, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/3546

Credits: This etext was produced by Col Choat


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EUREKA STOCKADE ***
[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]





This etext was produced by Col Choat colc@gutenberg.org.au





The Eureka Stockade





NOTA BENE

In Person I solicit no subscription--in writing I hereby
ask no favour from my reader.  A book must stand or fall
by the truth contained in it.

What I wish to note is this:  I was taught the English
language by the Very Reverend W. Vincent Eyre, Vice Rector
of the English College, Rome.  It has cost me immense
pains to rear my English up to the mark; but I could never
master the language to perfection.  Hence, now and then,
probably to the annoyance of my Readers, I could not help
the foreign idiom.  Of course, a proper edition,
in Italian, will be published in Turin.

I have nothing further to say.

Carboni Raffaello.

Prince Albert Hotel, Bakery Hill,, Ballaarat,
Anniversary of the Burning of Bentley's Eureka Hotel, 1855.




Chapter I.



Favete Linguis.


Mendacium sibi, sicut turbinis, viam augustam in urbe et orbe terrarum aperuit.
Stultus dicit in corde suo, "non est Deus."
Veritas vero lente passu passu sicut puer, tandem aliquando janunculat
   ad lucem.
Tunc justus ut palma florescit.*


[*Listen to me--
The lie, like the whirlwind, clears itself a royal road, either in town
   or country, through the whole face of the earth.
The fool in his heart says, "There is no God."
The truth, however slow, step by step, like a little child, someday, at last,
   finds a footpath to light.
Then the righteous flourish like a palm tree.]


I undertake to do what an honest man should do, let it thunder or rain.
He who buys this book to lull himself to sleep had better spend his money
in grog.  He who reads this book to smoke a pipe over it, let him provide
himself with Plenty of tobacco--he will have to blow hard.  A lover of truth--
that's the man I want--and he will have in this book the truth,
and nothing but the truth.

Facts, from the "stubborn-things" store, are here retailed and related--
contradiction is challenged from friend or foe.  The observation on,
and induction from the facts, are here stamped with sincerity:  I ask for no
other credit.  I may be mistaken:  I will not acknowledge the mistake
unless the contrary be proved.

When two boys are see-sawing on a plank, balanced on its centre, whilst
the world around them is "up" with the one it is "down" with the other.
The centre, however, is stationary.  I was in the centre.  I was an actor,
and therefore an eye-witness.  The events I relate, I did see them pass
before me.  The persons I speak of, I know them face to face.  The words
I quote, I did hear them with my own ears.  Others may know more or less
than I; I mean to tell all that I know, and nothing more.

Two reasons counsel me to undertake the task of publishing this work;
but a third reason is at the bottom of it, as the potent lever; and they are--

1st.  An honourable ambition urging me to have my name remembered among
the illustrious of Rome.  I have, on reaching the fortieth year of my age,
to publish a work at which I have been plodding the past eighteen years.
An ocean of grief would overwhelm me if then I had to vindicate my character:
how, under the hospitality of the British flag, I was put in the felon's dock
of a British Supreme Court to be tried for high treason.

2nd.  I have the moral courage to show the truth of my text above,
because I believe in the resurrection of life.

3rd.  Brave comrades in arms who fell on that disgraced Sabbath morning,
December 3rd, worthy of a better fate, and most certainly of a longer
remembrance, it is in my power to drag your names from an ignoble oblivion,
and vindicate the unrewarded bravery of one of yourselves!  He was once
my mate, the bearer of our standard, the "Southern Cross."  Shot down by
a murderous hand, he fell and died struggling like a man in the cause
of the diggers.  But he was soon forgotten.  That he was buried is known
by the tears of a few true friends! the place of his burial is little known,
and less cared for.

'Sunt tempora nostra; non mutabimur nec mutamur in illis; jam perdidi spem.'

The work will be published on the 1st of December next, and given to each
subscriber by the Author's own hand, on the site of the Eureka Stockade,
from the rising to the setting of the sun, on the memorable third.




Chapter II.



A Jove Principum.


"Wanted a governor.  Apply to the People of Victoria:" that was the
extraordinary advertisement, a new chum in want of employment, did meet
in the usual column of 'The Argus', December 1852.  Many could afford to laugh
at it, the intelligent however, who had immigrated here, permanently to better
his condition, was forced to rip up in his memory a certain fable of Aesop.
Who would have dared then to warn the fatted Melbourne frogs weltering in grog,
their colonial glory, against their contempt for King Log?  Behold King Stork
is your reward.  'Tout comme chez nous.'

One remark before I start for the gold-fields.  As an old European traveller
I had set apart a few coppers for the poor at my landing.  I had no opportunity
for them.  "We shall do well in this land;" was my motto.  Who is going to be
the first beggar?  Not I!  My care for the poor would have less disappointed
me, if I had prepared myself against falling in the unsparing clutches
of a shoal of land-sharks, who swarmed at that time the Yarra Yarra wharfs.
Five pounds for landing my luggage, was the A, followed by the old colonial C,
preceded by the double D.  Rapacity in Australia is the alpha and omega.
Yet there were no poor! a grand reflection for the serious.  Adam Smith,
settled the question of "the wealth of nations."  The source of pauperism
will be settled in Victoria by any quill-driver, who has the pluck to write
the history of public-houses in the towns, and sly-grog sellers
on the gold-fields.

Let us start for Ballaarat, Christmas, December 1852.--'Vide'--'tempore suo'--
'Julii Caesaris junioris.  De Campis Aureis, Australia Felix Commentaria.'

For the purpose, it is now sufficient to say that I had joined a party;
fixed our tent on the Canadian Flat; went up to the Camp to get our gold
licence; for one pound ten shilling sterling a head we were duly licensed
for one month to dig, search for, and remove gold, etc.--We wanted to drink
a glass of porter to our future success, but there was no Bath Hotel
at the time.--Proceeded to inspect the famous Golden Point (a sketch of which
I had seen in London in the 'Illustrated News').  The holes all around,
three feet in diameter, and five to eight feet in depth, had been abandoned!
we jumped into one, and one of my mates gave me the first lesson
in "fossiking,"--In less than five minutes I pounced on a little pouch--
the yellow boy was all there,--my eyes were sparkling,--I felt a sensation
identical to a first declaration of love in by-gone times.--"Great works,"
at last was my bursting exclamation.  In old Europe I had to take off my hat
half a dozen times, and walk from east to west before I could earn one pound
in the capacity of sworn interpreter, and translator of languages in the city
of London.  Here, I had earned double the amount in a few minutes,
without crouching or crawling to Jew or Christian.  Had my good angel
prevailed on me to stick to that blessed Golden Point, I should have now
to relate a very different story:  the gold fever, however, got the best of
my usual judgment, and I dreamt of, and pretended nothing else, than a hole
choked with gold, sunk with my darling pick, and on virgin ground.--I started
the hill right-hand side, ascending Canadian Gully, and safe as the
Bank of England I pounced on gold--seventeen and a half ounces, depth ten feet.




Chapter III.



Jupiter Tonans.


One fine morning (Epiphany week), I was hard at work (excuse old chum,
if I said hard:  though my hand had been scores of times compelled in London
to drop the quill through sheer fatigue, yet I never before handled a pick
and shovel), I hear a rattling noise among the brush.  My faithful dog,
Bonaparte, would not keep under my control.  "What's up?"  "Your licence,
mate." was the peremptory question from a six-foot fellow in blue shirt,
thick boots, the face of a ruffian armed with a carbine and fixed bayonet.
The old "all right" being exchanged, I lost sight of that specimen of colonial
brutedom and his similars, called, as I then learned, "traps" and "troopers."
I left off work, and was unable to do a stroke more that day.

"I came, then, 16,000 miles in vain to get away from the law of the sword!"
was my sad reflection.  My sorrow was not mitigated by my mates and neighbours
informing me, that Australia was a penal settlement.  Inveterate murderers,
audacious burglars, bloodthirsty bushrangers, were the ruling triumvirate,
the scour of old Europe, called Vandemonians, in this bullock-drivers' land.
Of course I felt tamed, and felt less angry, at the following search
for licence.  At the latter end of the month, one hundred and seventy
seven pounds troy, in two superb masses of gold, were discovered at the depth
of sixty feet, on the hill opposite where I was working.  The talk was soon
Vulcanish through the land.  Canadian Gully was as rich in lumps as other
gold-fields are in dust.  Diggers, whom the gold fever had rendered
stark blind, so as to desert Ballaarat for Mount Alexander and Bendigo,
now returned as ravens to the old spot; and towards the end of February, '53,
Canadian Gully was in its full glory.




Chapter IV.



Incipit Lamentatio.


The search for licences, or "the traps are out to-day"--their name at the
time--happened once a month.  The strong population now on this gold-field had
perhaps rendered it necessary twice a month.  Only in October, I recollect
they had come out three times.  Yet, "the traps are out" was annoying,
but not exasperating.  Not exasperating, because John Bull, 'ab initio et
ante secula', was born for law, order, and safe money-making on land and sea.
They were annoying, because, said John, not that he likes his money more
than his belly, but he hates the bayonet:  I mean, of course, he does not want
to be bullied with the bayonet.  To this honest grumbling of John,
the drunkard, that is the lazy, which make the incapables, joined their cant,
and the Vandemonians pulled up with wonted audacity.  In a word, the
thirty shillings a month for the gold licence became a nuisance.

A public meeting was announced on Bakery-hill.  It was in November, 1853.
Four hundred diggers were present.  I recollect I heard a "Doctor Carr"
poking about among the heaps of empty bottles all round the Camp, and asked
who paid for the good stuff that was in them, and whither was it gone.
Of course, Doctor Carr did not mention, that one of those bottles, corked
and sealed with the "Crown," was forced open with Mr. Hetherington's corkscrew;
and that said Dr. Carr had then to confess that the bottle aforesaid contained
a nobbler some 250 pounds worth for himself.  Great works already at Toorak.
'Tout cela soit dit en passant.'  Mr. Hetherington, then a storekeeper
on the Ballaarat Flat, and now of the Cladendon Hotel, Ballaarat Township,
is a living witness.  For the fun of the thing, I spoke a few words
which merited me a compliment from the practitioner, who also honoured me
with a private precious piece of information--"'Nous allons bientot avoir
la Republique Australienne!  Signore.'"  "'Quelle farce! repondis je.'"  The
specimen of man before me impressed me with such a decided opinion
of his ability for destroying sugarsticks, that at once I gave him credit
as the founder of a republic for babies to suck their thumbs.

In short, here dates the Victorian system of 'memorialising.'  The diggers
of Ballaarat sympathised with those of Bendigo in their common grievances,
and prayed the governor that the gold licence be reduced to thirty shillings
a month.  There was further a great waste of yabber-yabber about the diggers
not being represented in the Legislative Council, and a deal of fustian
was spun against the squatters.  I understood very little of those matters
at the time:  the shoe had not pinched my toe yet.

Every one returned to his work; some perhaps not very peacefully, on account
of a nobbler or two over the usual allowance.




Chapter V.



Risum Teneatis Amici.


I recollect towards this time I followed the mob to Magpie Gully.  It was
a digger's life.  Hard work by day, blazing fire in the evening, and sound
sleep by night at the music of drunken quarrels all around, far and near.
I had marked my claim in accordance with the run of the ranges, and safe
as the Bank of England I bottomed on gold.  No search for licence ever
took place.  What's the matter?  Oh, the diggers of Bendigo, by sheer
moral force, in the shape of some ten thousand in a mob, had inspired
with better sense the red-tape there and somewhere else, so I took out
my licence at the reasonable rate of two pounds for three months,
my contribution for the support of gold-lace.  So far so good.  I had no fault
to find with our governor Joseph Latrobe, Esquire; nor do I believe
that the diggers cared about anything else from him.  Was it then his being
an esquire that brought his administration into contempt?  The fact is,
a clap of "The Thunder" from Printing House-square boomed on the tympanum
of my ear.  We diggers got the gracious title of "vagabonds," and our massa
"Joe," for his pains to keep friends with us, was put down "an incapable;"
all for the honour of British rule, of course.

"Wanted a Governor," was now no longer a dummy in 'The Argus'; but, unhappily,
no application was made to the people of Victoria.

Give a dog a bad name--and the old proverb holds good even at the antipodes.
My trampings are now transcribed from my diary.

With the hot winds whirled in the Vandemonian rush to the Ballaarat Flat.
My hole was next to the one which was jumped by the Eureka mob, and where
one man was murdered in the row.  At sixty-five feet we got on a blasted log
of a gum-tree that had been mouldering there under a curse, since the times
of Noah!  The whole flat turned out an imperial shicer.  (You do not sink
deep enough, Signore Editor.)  Slabs that had cost us some eight pounds
a hundred would not fetch, afterwards, one pound.  We left them to sweat
freely in the hole; and all the mob got on the fuddle.  My mate and myself
thought we had been long enough together, and got asunder for a change.
I was soon on the tramp again.  Bryant's Ranges was the go of the day,
and I started thither accordingly.  December, 1853.  Oh, Lord! what a pack
of ragamuffins over that way!  I got acquainted with the German party
who found out the Tarrangower den; shaped my hole like a bathing tub,
and dropped "on it" right smart.  Paid two pounds to cart one load down
the Loddon, and left two more loads of washing stuff, snug and wet
with the sweat of my brow over the hole.  Got twenty-eight pennyweights
out of the load.  Went back the third day, brisk and healthy, to cart down
the other two loads.  Washing stuff! gone:  hole! gone:  the gully itself!
gone:  the whole face of it had been clean shaved.  Never mind, go ahead again.
Got another claim on the surface-hill.  No search for licence:  thank God,
had none.  Nasty, sneaky, cheeky little things of flies got into my eyes:
could see no more, no ways.  Mud water one shilling a bucket!  Got the
dysentery; very bad.  Thought, one night, to reef the yards and drop
the anchor.  Got on a better tack though.  Promenaded up to the famous Bendigo.
Had no particular objection to Celestials there, but had no particular taste
for their tartaric water.  Made up my mind to remember my days of innocence,
and turned shepherd.  Fine landscape this run on the Loddon:  almost a match
for Bella Italia, but there are too many mosquitoes.  Dreamt, one day,
I was drinking a tumbler of Loddon wine; and asserted that Providence
was the same also in the south.  It was a dream.  The lands lay waste
and desolate:  not by nature; oh no; by hand of man.  Bathing in these
Loddon water-holes, superb.  Tea out of this Loddon water magnificent.
In spite of these horrible hot winds, this water is always fresh and delicious:
how kind is Providence!  One night lost the whole blessed lot of my flock.
Myself, the shepherd, did not know, in the name of heavens, which way to turn.
Got among the blacks, the whole Tarrang tribe in corrobory.  Lord,
what a rum sight for an old European traveller.  Found natives very humane,
though.  My sheep right again, only the wild dogs had given them a good shake.
Was satisfied that the Messiah the Jews are looking for will not be born
in this bullock-drivers' land; any how, the angels won't announce the happy
event of his birth to the shepherds.  No more truck with sheep, and went
to live with the blacks for a variation.  Picked up, pretty soon, bits
of their yabber-yabber.  For a couple of years had tasted no fish;
now I pounced on a couple of frogs, every couple of minutes.  Thought
their 'lubras' ugly enough; not so, however, the slender arms and small hands
of their young girls, though the fingers be rather too long.

That will do now, in as much as the end of the story is this:  That portion
in my brains called "acquisitiveness" got the gold-fever again, and I started
for old Ballaarat.




Chapter VI.



Sua Cuique Voluntas.


I was really delighted to see the old spot once more; Easter, 1854.
I do not mean any offence to my fellow-diggers elsewhere; it struck me
very forcibly, however, that our Ballaarat men look by far more decent, and
our storekeepers, or grog-sellers if you like, undoubtedly more respectable.

Of a constitution not necessarily savage, I did not fail to observe
that the fair ones had ventured now on a large scale to trust their virtue
among us vagabonds, and on a hot-wind day, I patronized of course some
refreshment room.

I met my old mate, and we determined to try the old game; but this time
on the old principle of 'labor omnia vincit'--I pitched my tent right in
the bush, and prophesied, that from my door I would see the golden hole
in the gully below.

I spoke the truth, and such is the case this very day.  Feast of the
Assumption, 1855:--What sad events, however, were destined to pass exactly
before the very door of my tent!  Who could have told me on that Easter Sunday,
that the unknown hill which I had chosen for my rest, would soon be called
the Massacre Hill!  That next Christmas, my mate would lie in the grave,
somewhere forgotten:  and I in the gaol! the rope round my neck!!

Let us keep in good spirits, good reader, we shall soon have to weep
together enough.

Gravel Pits, famous for its strong muster of golden holes, and blasting
shicers, was too deep for me.  The old Eureka was itself again.  The jewellers
shops, which threatened to exhaust themselves in Canadian Gully, were again
the talk of the day:  and the Eureka gold dust was finer, purer, brighter,
immensely darling.  The unfaithful truants who had rushed to Bryant's Ranges,
to knock their heads against blocks of granite, now hastened for the third time
to the old spot, Ballaarat, determined to stick to it for life or death.
English, German, and Scotch diggers, worked generally on the Gravel Pits,
the Irish had their stronghold on the Eureka.  The Americans fraternised
with all the wide-awake, 'ubi caro ibi vultures.'

Here begins as a profession the precious game of 'shepherding,' or keeping
claims in reserve; that is the digger turning squatter.  And, as this happened
under the reign of a gracious gold commissioner, so I am brought to speak of
the gold licence again.  First I will place the man before my reader, though.

Get a tolerable young pig, make it stand on his hind legs, put on its head
a cap trimmed with gold-lace, whitewash its snout, and there you have the ass
in the form of a pig; I mean to say a "man," with this privilege, that he
possesses in his head the brains of both the above-mentioned brutes.




Chapter VII.



Ludi Ballaaratenses.


Eureka was advancing fast to glory.  Each day, and not seldom twice a day,
the gutter gammoned and humbugged all us 'vagabonds' so deucedly, that the rush
to secure a claim "dead on it" rose to the standard of 'Eureka style,' that is,
'Ring, ring,' was the yell from some hundred human dogs, and soon hill and flat
poured out all spare hands to thicken the "ring."


By this time, two covies--one of them generally an Irishman had stripped
to their middle, and were "shaping" for a round or two.  A broken nose,
with the desired accomplishment of a pair of black eyes, and in all cases,
when manageable, a good smash in the regions either of the teeth, or of
the ribs--both, if possible, preferred--was supposed to improve the transaction
so much, that, what with the tooth dropping, or the rib cracking, or both,
as aforesaid, it was considered 'settled.'  Thus originated the special title
of 'rowdy mob,' or Tipperary, in reference to the Irish.  Let us have the
title clear.

The 'shepherding,' that is the squatting by one man women and children
had not got hold of this 'Dolce far niente' yet--the ground allotted by law
to four men; and the astuteness of our primitive shepherds having found it
cheap and profitable to have each claim visibly separated from the other
by some twenty-feet wall, which was mutually agreed upon by themselves alone,
to call it 'spare ground,' was now a grown-up institution.  Hence, whenever
the gutter, 120 feet below, took it into its head to bestir and hook it,
the faithful shepherds would not rest until they were sure to snore in peace
a foot and a half under ground from the surface, and six score feet
from 'bang on the gutter.'

This Ballaarat dodge would have been innocent enough, were it not for
'Young Ireland,' who, having fixed headquarters on the Eureka, was therefore
accused of monopolising the concern.  Now, suppose Paddy wanted to relish
a 'tip,' that is, a drop of gin on the sly, then Scotty, who had just
gulped down his 'toddy,' which was a drop of auld whisky, would take upon
himself the selfish trouble to sink six inches more in Paddy's hole,
which feat was called 'jumping;' and thus, broken noses, and other
accomplishments, as aforesaid, grew in proportion to tips, and 'toddy'
drunk on the sly.

I frequently saw horrid scenes of blood; but I was now an old chum and
therefore knew what was what in colonial life.

I had a Cameleon for a neighbour, who, in the garb of an Irishman,
flung his three half-shovels out of a hole on the hill punctually every
morning, and that was his work before breakfast.  Then, a red shirt
on his back, and a red cap on his head, he would, in the subsequent hour,
give evidence of his scorning to be lazy by putting down some three inches
deeper another hole below in the gully.  'Full stop;' he must have a 'blow,'
but the d----d things--his matches--had got damp, and so in a rage he must
hasten to his tent to light the pipe; that is, to put on the Yankee garb
and complete his forenoon work in a third hole of his, whose depth and shape
recommended him as a first rate grave-digger.

And what has all this bosh to do with the Eureka Stockade?




Chapter VIII.



Fiat Fustitia, Ruat Coelum.


As an old Ballaarat hand, I hereby assert, that much of the odium of the mining
community against red-tape, arose from the accursed practice of jumping.

One fact from the 'stubborn-things' store.  The Eureka gutter was fast
progressing down hill towards the Eureka gully.  A party of Britishers
had two claims; the one, on the slope of the hill, was bottomed on heavy gold;
the other, some four claims from it, and parallel with the range, was some
ninety feet deep, and was worked by day only, by three men:  a fourth man
would now and then bring a set of trimmed slabs from the first hole aforesaid,
where he was the principal 'chips.' There was a Judas Iscariot among the party.
One fine morning, a hole was bottomed down the gully, and proved a scheisser.
A rush, Eureka style, was the conseqence; and it was pretended now that
the gutter would keep with the ranges, towards the Catholic church.

A party of Yankees, with revolvers and Mexican knives--the garb of 'bouncers'
in those days--jumped the second hole of the Britishers, dismantled
the windlass, and Godamn'd as fast as the Britishers cursed in the colonial
style.  The excitement was awful.  Commissioner Rede was fetched to settle
the dispute.  An absurd and unjust regulation was then the law; no party
was allowed to have an interest in two claims at one and the same time,
which was called 'owning two claims.' The Yankees carried the day.
I, a living witness, do assert that, from that day, there was a 'down'
on the name of Rede.

For the commissioners, this jumping business was by no means an agreeable job.
They were fetched to the spot:  a mob would soon collect round the disputed
claim; and for 'fair play,' it required the wisdom of Solomon, because
the parties concerned set the same price on their dispute, as the two harlots
on the living child.

I.  The conflicting evidence, in consequence of hard swearing, prompted by
gold-thirst, the most horrible demon that depraves the human heart,
even a naturally honest heart.--II.  The incomprehensible, unsettled,
impracticable ordinances for the abominable management of the gold-fields;
which ordinances, left to the discretion--that is, the caprice; and
to the good sense--that is, the motto, 'odi profanum vulgus et arceo;'
and to the best judgment--that is the proverbial incapability of all
aristocractical red-tape, HOW TO RULE US VAGABONDS.  Both those reasons,
I say, must make even the most hardened bibber of Toorak small-beer acknowledge
and confess, that the perfidious mistake at head-quarters was, their persisting
to make the following Belgravian 'billet-doux' the 'sine qua non'
recommendation for gold-lace on Ballaarat (at the time):--


(ADDRESS)

"To the Victorian Board of Small Beer,

"Toorak (somewhere in Australasia, i.e., Australia Felix--inquire from
the natives, reported to be of blackskin, at the southern end of the globe.)

"Belgravia, First year of the royal projecting the Great Exhibition, Hyde Park.

"LADY STARVESEMPSTRESS, great-grand-niece of His Grace the
Duke Of CURRY-POWDER, begs to introduce to FORTYSHILLING TAKEHIMAWAY, Esquire,
of Toorak, see address, her brother-in-law, POLLIPUSS, WATERLOOBOLTER,
tenth son of the venerable Prebendary of North and South Palaver, Canon of
St. Sebastopol in the east, and Rector of Allblessedfools, West End--URGENT."


In justice, however, to Master Waterloobolter, candidate for gold-lace,
it must not be omitted that he is a Piccadilly young sprat, and so at Julien's
giant 'bal-masque', was ever gracious to the lady of his love.

"Miss Smartdeuce, may I beg the honour of your hand for the next waltz? surely
after a round or two you will relish your champagne."

"Yes," with a smothered "dear," was the sigh-drawn reply.

Who has the power to roar the command, "Thus far shalt thou go, and no
further," to the flood of tears from forlorn Smartdeuce, when her soft
Waterloobolter bolted for the gold-fields of Australia Felix.

To be serious.  How could any candid mind otherwise explain the honest
boldness of eight out of nine members of the first Local Court, Ballaarat,
who, one and all, I do not say dared, but I say called upon their fellow miners
to come forward to a public meeting on the old spot, Bakery-hill.  September,
Saturday, 30th, 1855.  Said members had already settled at that time
201 disputes, and given their judgement, involving some half a million sterling
altogether, for all what they knew, and yet not one miner rose one finger
against them, when they imperatively desired to know whether they had done
their duty and still possessed the confidence of their fellow diggers!
They (said members) are practical men, of our own adopted class,
elected by ourselves from among ourselves, to sit as arbitrators of our
disputes, and our representatives at the Local Court.  That's the key, for any
future Brougham, for the history of the Local Courts on the gold-fields.

It has fallen to my lot, however, to put the Eureka Stockade on record;
and, from the following 'Joe' chapter must begin any proper history
of that disgracefully memorable event.




Chapter IX.



Abyssus, Abyssum Invocat.


"Joe, Joe!" No one in the world can properly understand and describe this
shouting of "Joe," unless he were on this El Dorado of Ballaarat at the time.

It was a horrible day, plagued by the hot winds.  A blast of the hurricane
winding through gravel pits whirled towards the Eureka this shouting of "Joe."
It was the howl of a wolf for the shepherds, who bolted at once towards
the bush:  it was the yell of bull-dogs for the fossikers who floundered
among the deep holes, and thus dodged the hounds:  it was a scarecrow
for the miners, who now scrambled down to the deep, and left a licensed mate
or two at the windlass.  By this time, a regiment of troopers, in full gallop,
had besieged the whole Eureka, and the traps under their protection ventured
among the holes.  An attempt to give an idea of such disgusting and
contemptible campaigns for the search of licences is really odious to an honest
man.  Some of the traps were civil enough; aye, they felt the shame
of their duty; but there were among them devils at heart, who enjoyed the fun,
because their cupidity could not bear the sight of the zig-zag uninterrupted
muster of piles of rich-looking washing stuff, and the envy which blinded
their eyes prevented them from taking into account the overwhelming number
of shicers close by, round about, all along.  Hence they looked upon
the ragged muddy blue shirt as an object of their contempt.

Are diggers dogs or savages, that they are to be hunted on the diggings,
commanded, in Pellissier's African style, to come out of their holes,
and summoned from their tents by these hounds of the executive?  Is the garb
of a digger a mark of inferiority?  'In sudore vultus lue vesceris panem'*
is then an infamy now-a-days!

[* In the sweat of thy brow thou shalt eat bread.]

Give us facts, and spare us your bosh, says my good reader.--Very well.

I, CARBONII RAFFAELLO, da Roma, and late of No. 4, Castle-court, Cornhill,
City of London, had my rattling 'Jenny Lind' (the cradle) at a water-hole
down the Eureka Gully.  Must stop my work to show my licence.  'All right.'

I had then to go a quarter of a mile up the hill to my hole, and fetch
the washing stuff.  There again--"Got your licence?"  "All serene, governor."
On crossing the holes, up to the knees in mullock, and loaded like a dromedary,
"Got your licence?" was again the cheer-up from a third trooper or trap.
Now, what answer would you have given, sir?

I assert, as a matter of fact, that I was often compelled to produce my licence
twice at each and the same licence hunt.  Any one who knows me personally,
will readily believe that the accursed game worried me to death.




Chapter X.



Jam Non Estis Hospites Et Advenoe


It is to the purpose to say a few words more on the licence-hunting,
and have done with it.  Light your pipe, good reader, you have to blow hard.

Our red-tape, generally obtuse and arrogant, this once got rid of the usual
conceit in all things, and had to acknowledge that the digger who remained
quietly at his work, always possessed his licence.  Hence the troopers
were despatched like bloodhounds, in all directions, to beat the bush;
and the traps who had a more confined scent, creeped and crawled among
the holes, and sneaked into the sly-grog tents round about, in search of
the swarming unlicensed game.  In a word, it was a regular hunt.  Any one
who in Old England went fox-hunting, can understand pretty well,
the detestable sport we had then on the goldfields of Victoria.
Did any trooper succeed in catching any of the 'vagabonds' in the bush,
he would by the threat of his sword, confine him round a big gum-tree;
and when all the successful troopers had done the same feat, they took
their prisoners down the gully, where was the grand depot, because the traps
were generally more successful.  The commissioner would then pick up one pound,
two pounds, or five pounds, in the way of bail, from any digger that could
afford it, or had friends to do so, and then order the whole pack
of the penniless and friendless to the lock-up in the camp.  I am a living
eye-witness, and challenge contradiction.

This job of explaining a licence-hunt is really so disgusting to me,
that I prefer to close it with the following document from my subsequently
gaol-bird mate, then reporter of the 'Ballaarat Times':--


Police Court, Tuesday, October 24th.

HUNTING THE DIGGER.--Five of these fellows were fined in the mitigated trifle
of 5 pounds, for being without licences.  The nicest thing imaginable is to see
one of these clumsy fellows with great beards, shaggy hair, and oh! such nasty
rough hands, stand before a fine gentleman on the bench with hands
of shiny whiteness, and the colour of whose cambric rivals the Alpine snow.
There the clumsy fellow stands, faltering out an awkward apology, "my licence
is only just expired, sir--I've only been one day from town, sir--I have
no money, sir, for I had to borrow half a bag of flour the other day,
for my wife and children."  Ahem, says his worship, the law makes
no distinctions--fined 5 pounds.  Now our reporter enjoys this exceedingly,
for he is sometimes scarce of news; and from a strange aberration of intellect,
with which, poor fellow, he is afflicted, has sometimes, no news at all for us;
but he is sure of not being dead beat at any time, for digger-hunting
is a standing case at the police office, and our reporter is growing
so precocious with long practice, that he can tell the number of diggers fined
every morning, without going to that sanctuary at all.--'Ballaarat Times',
Saturday, October 28, 1854.




Chapter XI.



Salvum Fac Populum Tuum Domine.


The more the pity--I have not done yet with the accursed gold licence.
I must prevail on myself to keep cooler and in good temper.

Two questions will certainly be put to me:-

1st.  Did the camp officials give out the licence to the digger at the place
of his work, whenever required, without compelling him to leave off work,
and renew his licence at the camp?

2nd.  It was only one day in each month that there was a search for licences,
was it not?  Why therefore did not the diggers make it a half-holiday
on the old ground, that "all work and no play, makes Jack a dull boy."

The first question is a foolish one, from any fellow-colonist who knows
our silver and gold lace; and is a wicked one, from any digger who was
on Ballaarat at the time.

'Fellah' gave the proper answer through the 'Ballaarat Times',
October 14th;--here it is:--


To the Editor of the 'Ballaarat Times', October 14, 1854.

Sir,

Permit me to call your attention to the miserable accommodation
provided for the miner, who may have occasion to go to the Camp
to take out a licence.  Surely, with the thousands of pounds
that have been expended in government buildings, a little better
accommodation might be afforded to the well disposed digger,
who is willing to pay the odious tax demanded of him by government,
and not be compelled to stand in the rain or sun, or treated as if
the 'distinguished government official' feared that the digger
was a thing that would contaminate him by a closer proximity;
so the 'fellah' is kept by a wooden rail from approaching within
a couple of yards of the tent.  In consequence, many persons
mistaking the licence-office for the commissioner's water-closet,
a placard has been placed over the door.

I am, Sir, yours &c.,

FELLAH DIGGER,

Who had to walk a few miles to pay away the money he had worked
hard for, and was kept a few hours standing by a rail--not sitting
on a rail, Mary.


Now I mean to tackle in right earnest with the second question, provided I can
keep in sufficiently good temper.

On the morning of Thursday, the 22nd June, in the year of Grace,
One thousand eight hundred and fifty-four,
His Excellency SIR CHARLES HOTHAM,
Knight Commander of the Most Noble Military Order of the Bath, landed on
the shores of this fair province, as its Lieutenant-Governor, the chosen
and commissioned representative of Her Most Gracious Majesty, the QUEEN!
Never (writes the Melbourne historian of that day) never in the history
of public ovations, was welcome more hearty, never did stranger meet with
warmer welcome, on the threshold of a new home:

VICTORIA WELCOMES VICTORIA'S CHOICE, was the Melbourne proclamation.

The following is transcribed from my diary:-


"Saturday, August 26th, 1854:  His Excellency dashed in among us 'vagabonds'
on a sudden, at about five o'clock p.m., and inspected a shaft immediately
behind the Ballaarat Dining Rooms, Gravel-pits.  A mob soon collected
round the hole; we were respectful, and there was no 'joeing.'
On His Excellency's return to the camp, the miners busily employed themselves
in laying down slabs to facilitate his progress.  I was among the zealous ones
who improvised this shabby foot-path.  What a lack! we were all of us
as cheerful as fighting-cocks.--A crab-hole being in the way, our Big-Larry
actually pounced on Lady Hotham, and lifting her up in his arms, eloped
with her ladyship safely across, amid hearty peals of laughter, however
colonial they may have been.--Now Big Larry kept the crowd from annoying
the couple, by properly laying about him with a switch all along the road.

"His Excellency was hailed with three-times-three, and was proclaimed on the
Camp, now invaded by some five hundred blue shirts, the 'Diggers' Charley.'

"His Excellency addressed us miners as follows:-

"Diggers I feel delighted with your reception--I shall not neglect your
interests and welfare--again I thank you.

"It was a short but smart speech we had heard elsewhere, he was not fond
of 'twaddle,' which I suppose meant 'bosh.' After giving three hearty cheers,
old Briton's style to 'Charley,' the crowd dispersed to drink a nobbler
to his health and success.  I do so this very moment.  Eureka, under my
snug tent on the hill, August 26, 1854. C.R."


Within six short months, five thousand citizens of Melbourne, receive the name
of this applauded ruler with a loud and prolonged outburst of indignation!

Some twenty Ballaarat miners lie in the grave, weltering in their gore!
double that number are bleeding from bayonet wounds; thirteen more
have the rope round their necks, and two more of their leading men are priced
four hundred pounds for their body or carcase.

'Tout cela, n'est pas precisement comme chez nous, pas vrai?'

Please, give me a dozen puffs at my black-stump, and then I will proceed
to the next chapter.




Chapter XII.



Sufficit Diei Sua Vexatio.


Either this chapter must be very short, or I had better give it up
without starting it at all.

Up to the middle of September, 1854, the search for licences happened
once a month; at most twice:  perhaps once a week on the Gravel Pits,
owing to the near neighbourhood of the Camp.  Now, licence-hunting became
the order of the day.  Twice a week on every line; and the more the diggers
felt annoyed at it, the more our Camp officials persisted in goading us,
to render our yoke palatable by habit.  I assert, as an eye-witness
and a sufferer, that both in October and November, when the weather allowed it,
the Camp rode out for the hunt every alternate day.  True, one day they would
hunt their game on Gravel-pits, another day, they pounced on the foxes
of the Eureka; and a third day, on the Red-hill:  but, though working
on different leads, are we not all fellow diggers?  Did not several of us
meet again in the evening, under the same tent, belonging to the same party?
It is useless to ask further questions.

Towards the latter end of October and the beginning of November we had such
a set of scoundrels camped among us, in the shape of troopers and traps,
that I had better shut up this chapter at once, or else whirl the whole
manuscript bang down a shicer.

"Hold hard, though, take your time, old man:  don't let your Roman blood
hurry you off like the hurricane, and thus damage the merits of your case.
Answer this question first," says my good reader.

"If it be a fair one, I will."

"Was, then, the obnoxious mode of collecting the tax the sole cause
of discontent:  or was the tax itself (two pounds for three months)
objected to at the same time?"

"I think the practical miner, who had been hard at work night and day,
for the last four or six months, and, after all, had just bottomed a shicer,
objected to the tax itself, because he could not possibly afford to pay it.
And was it not atrocious to confine this man in the lousy lock-up at the Camp,
because he had no luck?"

Allow me, now, in return, to put a very important question, of the old
Roman stamp, 'Cui bono?' that is, Where did our licence money go to?
That's a nut which will be positively cracked by-and-bye.




Chapter XIII.



Ubi Caro, Ibi Vultures.


One morning, I woke all on a sudden.--What's up?  A troop of horse galloping
exactly towards my tent, and I could hear the tramping of a band of traps.
I got out of the stretcher, and hastened out of my tent.  All the neighbours,
in night-caps and unmentionables, were groping round the tents, to inquire
what was the matter.  It was not yet day-light.  There was a sly-grog seller
at the top of the hill; close to his store he had a small tent, crammed with
brandy cases and other grog, newly come up from town.  There must have been
a spy, who had scented such valuable game.

The Commissioner asked the storekeeper, who by this time was at the door
of his store:  "Whose tent is that?" indicating the small one in question.

"I don't know," was the answer.

"Who lives in it? who owns it? is anybody in?" asked the Commissioner.

"An old man owns it, but he is gone to town on business, and left it
to the care of his mate who is on the nightshift," replied the storekeeper.

"I won't peck up that chaff of yours, sir.  Halloo! who is in?  Open the tent;"
shouted the Commissioner.

No answer.

"I say, cut down this tent, and we'll see who is in;" was the order
of the Commissioner to two ruffianly looking troopers.

No sooner said than done; and the little tent was ripped up by their swords.
A government cart was, of course, ready in the gully below, and in less than
five minutes the whole stock of grog, some two hundred pounds sterling worth,
or five hundred pounds worth in nobblers, was carted up to the Camp,
before the teeth of some hundreds of diggers, who had now collected
round about.  We cried "Shame! shame!" sulkily enough, but we did not
interfere; first, because the store had already annoyed us often enough
during the long winter nights; second, because the plunderers were such
Vandemonian-looking traps and troopers, that we were not encouraged
to say much, because it would have been of no use.

As soon, however, as the sun was up, and all hands were going to work,
the occurrence not only increased the discontent that had been brewing
fast enough already, but it rose to excitement; and such a state of
exasperated feelings, however vented in the shouting of 'Joe,' did certainly
not prepare the Eureka boys to submit with patience to a licence-hunt
in the course of the day.

First and foremost:  it is impossible to prevent the sale of spirits
on the diggings; and not any laws, fines, or punishment the government
may impose on the dealers or consumers can have an effect towards putting
a stop to sly-grog selling.  A miner working, as during the past winter,
in wet and cold, must and will have his nobbler occasionally; and very
necessary, too, I think.  No matter what the cost, he will have it;
and it cannot be dispensed with, if he wish to preserve his health:  he won't
go to the Charley Napier Hotel, when he can get his nobbler near-handy,
and thereby give a lift to Pat or Scotty.

Secondly:  I hereby assert that the breed of spies in this colony prospered
by this sly-grog selling.  "We want money," says some of the 'paternals'
at Toorak.

"Oh! well, then," replies another at Ballaarat, "come down on a few
storekeepers and unlicensed miners and raise the wind.  We can manage a
thousand or two that way.  Let the blood-hounds on the scent, and it is done."

And so a scoundrel, in the disguise of an honest man, takes with him
another worse devil than himself, and goes round like a roaring lion,
seeking what he may devour.

If I had half the fifty pounds fine inflicted on sly-grog sellers,
and five pounds fine on unlicensed diggers, raised on Ballaarat at this time,
I think my fellow-colonists would bow their heads before me.  Great works!

Thirdly:  An act of silver and gold lace humanity was going the rounds
of our holes, above and below.

A person is found in an insensible state, caused by loss of blood,
having fallen, by accident, on a broken bottle and cut an artery in his head.
He is conveyed to the Camp hospital.

After some few hours, because he raves from loss of blood, and at a time
when he requires the closest attention, he is unceremoniously carried
into the common lock-up, and there left, it is said, for ten hours,
lying on the floor, without any attention being paid to his condition
by the hospital authorities, and then it was only by repeated representations
of his sinking state, to other officials, that he was conveyed to the hospital,
where he expired in two hours afterwards!

"Below!"

"Haloo!"

"Jim; the miners of Ballaarat demand an investigation."

"And they must have it, Joe."

Such was the scene in those days, performed at every shaft, in Gravel-pits,
as well as on the Eureka.




Chapter XIV.



Flagitur Vulcano Si Fulmina Parata.


Here is a short resume of events which led to the popular demonstration
on Tuesday, October 17th, 1854.

Two men, old friends, named Scobie and Martin, after many years separation,
happened to meet each other in Ballaarat.  Joy at the meeting, led them
to indulge in a wee drop for 'Auld lang Syne.'  In this state of happy feeling,
they call at the Eureka Hotel, on their way home, intending to have
a finishing glass.  They knock at the door, and are refused admittance,
very properly, on account of their drunkenness.  They leave, and proceed
on their way, not, perhaps without the usual colonial salutations.
At about fifty yards from the hotel, they hear a noise behind them,
and retrace their steps.  They are met by persons, unknown, who inflict blows
on them, which render one insensible and the other lifeless.

A coroner's inquest was held on the body, the verdict of which was,
"that deceased had died from injuries inflicted by persons unknown;"
but public feeling seemed to point to Mr. Bentley, the proprietor of the
Eureka Hotel; who, together with his wife and another party,
were charged with the murder, tried at the police court, and acquitted.

The friends of deceased, considering that both the inquest and the trial
were unfairly conducted, agreed to meet on Tuesday, October 17th, on the spot
where the man was murdered, and devise measures to discover the guilty parties,
and to bring them to justice.

Accordingly, at an early hour, the hill on which is situated the Eureka Hotel
was thronged by thousands; so great was the excitement.

THOMAS KENNEDY, was naturally enough the lion of the day.  A thick head, bold,
but bald, the consequence perhaps not of his dissipation; but of his worry
in by gone days.  His merit consists in the possession of the chartist slang;
hence his cleverness in spinning, a yarn never to the purpose, but blathered
with long phrases and bubbling with cant.  He took up the cause of the diggers,
not so much for the evaporation of his gaseous heroism, as eternally to hammer
on the unfortunate death of his country-man Scobie, for the sake of
'auld lang syne.'

When pressed by the example of others to burn his license, at the subsequent
monster meeting, he had none to burn, because he had a wife and four children
dependent on him for support, and therefore I do not know what to say further.

These and other resolutions were carried unanimously:-

"That this meeting, not being satisfied with the manner in which the
proceedings connected with the death of the late James Scobie, have been
conducted, either by the magistrates or by the coroner, pledges itself to use
every lawful means to have the case brought before other, and more competent
authorities.

"That this meeting deems it necessary to collect subscriptions for the purpose
of offering a reward for the conviction of the murderers, and defraying
all other expenses connected with the prosecution of the case."




Chapter XV.



Nam Tua Res Agitur, Paries Cum Proximus Ardet.


The one pervading opinion among the multitude of miners and others who had been
attracted thither, appeared to be that Bentley was the murderer; and loud
were the cries, the hooting, and groans against him.  It would appear
that the Camp authorities contemplated some little disturbance,
and consequently all the available force of police and mounted troopers
were on guard at the hotel and made a very injudicious display of their
strength.  Not only did they follow, but ride through, the crowd of people
at the meeting; and it is to this display of their strength that must be
attributed the fire, and other outbursts of indignation.  Miners who have stood
the working of a Canadian or Gravel-pit shicer, scorn danger in any form.

The crowd, excessively irritated on seeing the large display of the hated
police force began to shout and yell.  Presently, a stone came from
the mass, and passing near the head of one of the officials, broke a pane
of glass in one of the windows of the hotel.  The sound of the falling glass
appeared to act like magic on the multitude; and bottles, stones, sticks,
and other missiles, were speedily put in requisition to demolish the windows,
until not a single pane was left entire, while every one that was broken
drew a cheer from the crowd.  The police, all this time, were riding round
and round the hotel, but did not take any vigorous measures to deter the people
from the sport they appeared to enjoy so much.  The crowd advance nearer--near
enough to use sticks to beat in the casements.  They make an entrance,
and, in a moment, furniture, wearing apparel, bedding, drapery, are tossed out
of the windows; curtains, sheets, etc., are thrown in the air, frightening
the horses of the troopers, who have enough to do to keep their saddles;
the weather-boards are ripped off the side of the house, and sent spinning
in the air.  A real Californian takes particular care of, and delights in
smashing the crockery.

Mr. Rede, the resident Commissioner, arrives, and endeavours to pacify
the people by speechifying, but it will not do.  He mounts the sill of where
was once a window, and gesticulates to the crowd to hear him.  An egg is thrown
from behind a tent opposite, and narrowly misses his face, but breaks
on the wall of the house close to him.  The Commissioner becomes excited,
and orders the troopers to take the man in charge; but no trooper appears
to relish the business.

A cry of "Fire!" is raised; a horse shies and causes commotion.  Smoke is seen
to issue from one of the rooms of the ground-floor.  The police extinguish it;
and an attempt is made to form a cordon round the building.  But it is
too late.  Whilst the front of the hotel occupies the attention of the majority
of the crowd, a few are pulling down the back premises.

Mr. Rede sends for the detachment of the gallant 40th now stationed
on Ballaarat.

A shout is raised:--"The 40th are coming."

"Don't illuminate till they come."

"They shall see the sight."

"Wait till they come."

Smash go the large lamps in front of the hotel.  The troopers ride round
and caracole their horses.

"Where's the red-coats?"

"There they come, yonder up the hill!"

"Hurrah! three cheers."

The 40th arrive; they form into line in front of the hotel, swords drawn.
"Hurrah! boys! no use waiting any longer."--"Down she comes." The bowling alley
is on fire.--Police try to extinguish the flames--rather too warm.--It's
too late.--The hotel is on fire at the back corner; nothing can save it.--"Hip,
hip hurrah!" is the universal shout.

I had opportunities enough to observe in London, that a characteristic
of the British race is to make fun of the calamity of fire, hence I did not
wonder, how they enjoyed this, their real sport on the occasion.

A gale of wind, which blowed at this exact time, announcing the hurricane
that soon followed, was the principal helper to the devouring of the building,
by blowing in the direction most favourable to the purpose.

The red-coats wheel about, and return to the Camp.  Look out! the roof
of the back part of the hotel, falls in!  "Hurrah! boys, here's the porter
and ale with the chill off."

Bottles are handed out burning hot--the necks of two bottles are knocked
together!--Contents drunk in colonial style.--Look out! the roof,
sides and all fall in!--An enormous mass of flame and smoke arises
with a roaring sound.--Sparks are carried far, far into the air,
and what was once the Eureka Hotel, is now a mass of burning embers!

The entire diggings, in a state of extreme excitement.--The diggers are lords
and masters of Ballaarat; and the prestige of the Camp is gone for ever.




Chapter XVI.



Loquar In Amaritudine Animoe.  Meoe


Now my peace of mind being destroyed, I had recourse to the free British press,
for information, wishing to hear what they said in Melbourne.  At this time
the Morning Herald was in good demand; but the 'Geelong Advertiser' had
the swayn on the goldfields.  Geelong had a rattling correspondent on
Ballaarat, who helped to hasten the movement fast enough.  As I did not
know this correspondent of the 'Geelong Advertiser' personally, so I can
only guess at his frame of mind.  I should say the following ingredients
entered into the factory of his ideas:-

1st.  The land is the Lord's and all therein; but man must earn his bread
by the sweat of his brow.  Therefore, in the battle of life, every man
must fight his way on the old ground, "help yourself and God will help you."

2nd.  In olden times, wherever there was a Roman there was life.  In our times,
wherever there is a Britain there is trade, and trade is life.  But with
the lazy,--who, either proud or mean, is always an incapable, because
generally he is a drunkard, and therefore a beggar, there is no possible
barter; and, inasmuch as man does not live on bread alone, for a fried sole
is a nice thing for breakfast, so also it must be confessed that the loaves
and fishes do not condescend to jump into one's mouth all dressed
as they ought to be.  Therefore--and this is the zenith of the
'Geelong Advertiser's' practical correspondent--be not perplexed, if the loaves
and fishes wont pop fast enough into your mouth particularly; let Mahomed's
example be instantly followed:  go yourself to the loaves and fishes,
and you will actually find that they are subject to the same laws of matter
and motion as everything else on earth.

3rd.  The application.  For what did any one emigrate to this colony?
To sweat more?  Well, times were hard enough for the poor in old Europe.
Let him sweat more, but for whom?  For himself of course, and good luck to him.
Is there not plenty of Victoria land for every white man or black man
that intends to grow his potatoes?  Oh! leave the greens-growing to the
well-disposed, to the well affected, ye sturdy sons who pant after
the yellow-boy.  "Take your chance, out of a score of shicers, there is one
'dead on it,'" says old Mother Earth from the deep.

Sum total.--With the hard-working gold-digger, there is a solid barter
possible.  Hurrah! for the diggers.

'The Argus' persisting in 'our own conceit,' and misrepresenting, perverting,
and slandering the cause of the diggers, ran foul, and went fast to leeward.
Experience having instructed me at my own costs, that there cannot possibly
exist much sympathy between flunkies and blueshirts, I can only guess
at the compound materials hammered in the mortar of 'The Argus' reporter
on Ballaarat:--

lst.  The land is the Queen's, and the inheritance of the Crown.

2nd.  Who dares to teach the golden-lace the idea how to shoot?

3rd.  Let learning, commerce, even manners die, But leave us our old nobility.

4th.  'Sotto voce':--In this colony, however, make money; honestly if possible,
of course, but make money; or else the 'vagabonds' here would humble down
a gentleman to curry-powder diet.

5th.  To put on a blue shirt, and rush in with the Eureka mob! fudge:
'odi profanum vulgus et arceo.'  There are millions of tons of gold dug out
already, as much anyhow, as anyone can carry to Old England, and live
as a lord, with an occasional trip to Paris and Naples, to make up for
the time wasted in this colony.

Sum total.--Screw out of the diggers as much as circumstances will admit;
they have plenty of money for getting drunk, and making beasts of themselves,
the brutes!

To be serious; should a copy of this book be forgotten somewhere, and thereby
be spared for the use of some southern Tacitus, let him bewail the perfidious
mendacity of our times, whose characteristic is SLANDER, which proceeds
from devil GROG; and the pair generate THE PROSPERITY OF THE WICKED.
Here is a sample:-

On Saturday, September 29th, 1854, the members of the Local Court, Ballaarat,
held a public meeting on the usual spot, Bakery-hill, for the purpose of
taking the sense of their fellow miners, respecting the admittance
or nonadmittance of the legal profession to advise or plead in said court.--
See report in The Star, a new local paper, No. V, Tuesday, October 2nd.

Messrs. Ryce and Wall having addressed the meeting in their usual honest,
matter-of-fact way:-


"Great Works" was shouted and immediately appeared
C. Raffaello, member of the Local Court.  He hoped,
that if there were any Goodenough present that they
would see and not mislay their notes while he briefly
brought three things before the meeting; the first
concerned the meeting and himself, the second concerned
himself, and the third concerned those present. The
first was easily disposed of--have I, as I promised,
done my duty as member of the Local Court to your
satisfaction? (Yes, and cheers.) Very well, the second
matter concerns myself--personally he was under no
obligations to the lawyers--the services he received
at the trial was done to him as a state prisoner,
and not to Carboni Raffaello individually; when
individually, he requested to be supplied with six
pennyworth of snuff by Mr. Dunne, it was promised,
but it never came to him.  It would not have cost much
to have supplied him, and it would have greatly obliged
him, as habit had rendered snuff-taking necessary to him.
With the permission of those present he would take
a pinch now.  (He took a pinch amidst laughter and cheers.)

The admission of lawyers into the Local Court would give
rise to endless feuds, where valuable interests were
concerned, and so much time would be lost in useless
litigation.  As he had no wish through any personal
obligation to see the lawyers in the Local Court,
and as he considered that it was for the advantage of
the miners that they should not be admitted, he opposed
their entrance.

The third matter concerned those present.  What did they
come to Australia for?  Why, to improve their prospects
in reality, though on shipboard they might say it was to
get rid of the 'governor,' or to get clear of an ugly wife,
and now that you are here are you to allow the Ballaarat
lawyers to fleece you of your hard earnings?  Not being
fond of yabber-yabber he would simply ask:  are you fairly
represented by us?  (Yes, yes.) If so then support us,
and if we do not represent you we will resign.  Don't say
yes if you don't mean it, for I do not like yabber-yabber.


I beg to assert, that the above report is correct, as far as it goes.  Some
five hundred diggers were present.  Now for the perversion from the reporter
of 'The Argus', Melbourne, Tuesday, October 2.

"Carboni Raffaello, a foreigner [a foreign anarchist, if you please,
Mr. Editor], then spoke in his usual style [that is, sedition, revolution,
and rebellion, that's it], the principal (sic) points of his remarks being,
that while incarcerated in the Melbourne gaol [was it for common felony,
or high treason?] he was not supplied with snuff, though he had entreated
his learned counsel, Mr. J. H. Dunne, for sixpenny worth.  He [Please,
Raffaello or Dunne? fine pair together] did not consider himself under
any obligation to the lawyers:  he [but who?  Dunne or Raffaello?] was not fond
of yabber-yabber."

Thus an honest man is brayed at by asses in this colony! The fun is odious
and ridiculous enough.

When such reporters of the British press prostitute British ink, the only ink
that dares to register black on white the name, word and deed of any tyrant
through the whole face of the earth, and for the sake of a pair of
Yankee boots, lower themselves to the level of a scribbler, thus affording
to be audacious because anonymous, the British press in the southern hemisphere
will be brought to shame, and Victoria cannot possibly derive any benefit
from it.

Let the above observation stand good, I proceed with my work.

'The Age' was then just budding, and was considered, on the diggings the organ
of the new chum Governor.  'The Age' soon mustered a Roman courage in the cause
of the diggers, and jumped the claims both of The Herald and 'The Argus';
and though the 'own correspondent,' under the head of Ballaarat, be such a dry,
soapy concern that will neither blubber nor blather, yet 'The Age' remained
the diggers' paper.

The 'Ballaarat Times' was all the go, on the whole extent of the diggings.
Soon enough the reporter, aye, the editor himself, will both appear
'in propria persona'.




Chapter XVII.



Arcane, Impenetrabili, Profunde,
Son Le Vie Di Chi Die L'Esser Al Niente.


When our southern sky is overloaded with huge, thick, dark masses, and claps
of thunder warn us of the pending storm, then a gale of wind is roaring
in space, doing battle with the bush, cowing down man and beast, sweeping away
all manner of rottenness.  This fury spares not, and desolation is the threat
of the thunder.

A kind Providence must be blessed even in the whirlwind.  Big, big drops
of rain fight their way through the gale; soon the drops muster in legions,
and the stronger the storm, the stronger those legions.  At last they conquer;
then it pours down--that is, the flood is made up of legions of torrents.

Is the end of the world now at hand?  Look at the victorious rainbow!
it reminds man of the covenant of our God with Noah, not far from this
southern land.  The sun restores confidence that all is right again as before,
and nature, refreshed and bolder, returns again to her work.

Hence, the storm is life.

Not so is the case with fire.  Devouring everything, devouring itself,
fire seems to leave off its frenzy, only to devour the sooner any mortal thing
that comes in the way to retard destruction.  A few embers, then a handful
of ashes, are the sole evidence of what was once kingly or beggarly.

Fire may destroy, consume, devour, but has no power to reduce to 'nothing.'

Hence the calamity of fire is death.

The handful of ashes lie lifeless until a storm forces them into the living
order of nature, which, when refreshed, has the power to ingraft those
ashes to, and make them prosper with, the grain of mustard seed.

Hence death is life.

Such is the order of Providence.  Now, good reader, watch the handful of ashes
of what was once Bentley's Eureka Hotel.




Chapter XVIII.



Pecunia Omnia Vincit.


In the dead of the night after the burning of the Eureka Hotel, three men
had been taken into custody, charged with riot, and subsequently committed
to take their trial in Melbourne.

I think the diggers at this time seriously contemplated to burn down the Camp,
and thus get rid in a blaze of all their grievances.

A committee for the defence of these men, met at the Star Hotel, and sent round
to all the tents on Ballaarat for subscriptions.  I contributed my mite,
and then learned that VERN, KENNEDY, and HUMFFRAY were the triumvirate
of said committee.

The following placard was posted throughout the goldfields:-


500 POUNDS REWARD

for the discovery, apprehension and conviction
of the murderer of James Scobie, found dead near
the late Eureka Hotel, etc., etc.


At one and at the same time, also, the following placards were posted
at each prominent gum-tree on the goldfield:-


500 POUNDS REWARD

increased by Government to

1,600 POUNDS!!

for the apprehension and conviction of the robbers
of the Bank of Victoria.


A desperate deed was committed in broad mid-day; Monday, October 16th,
in the Ballaarat township.

Four men in the garb of diggers, wearing sou'-wester hats, and having
crepe over their faces, entered the Bank of Victoria, and succeeded
in carrying off property in notes and gold, to the amount
of about 15,000 pounds.

Who would have told me then, that soon I should be messmate to those
unknown audacious robbers, in the same gaol!!

Let's go to the public meeting in the next chapter.




Chapter XIX.



Una Scintilla, Sparasi La Bomba,
Spalanca A Multitudini La Tomba.


The following story was going the rounds of the Eureka.  There was a
licence-hunt; the servant of the Rev. P. Smyth, the priest of the Catholic
church, Bakery-hill, went to a neighbouring tent to visit a sick man.
While inside, a trooper comes galloping up at the tent-door, and shouts out,
"Come out here, you d----d wretches! there's a good many like you on the
diggings."  The man came outside, and was asked if "he's got a licence?"
The servant, who is a native of Armenia, answers, in imperfect English,
that he is a servant to the priest.  The trooper says, "Damn you and
the priest," and forthwith dismounts for the purpose of dragging
Johannes M'Gregorius, the servant, along with him.  The servant remonstrates
by saying he is a disabled man, unable to walk over the diggings.
This infuriates the trooper, he strikes and knocks down the poor disabled
foreigner, drags him about, tears his shirt--in short, inflicting such injuries
on the poor fellow, that all the diggers present cried out "shame! shame!"

Commissioner Johnson rides up, and says to the crowd about him, that he should
not be interrupted in the execution of his 'dooty.' The priest hears
of his servant's predicament, comes to the spot, hands a five-pound note to
Johnson as bail for his servant's appearance the next day at the police-office.

The following morning, Johannes M`Gregorius is charged with being on
the gold-fields without a licence.  The poor foreigner tries to make a defence,
but was fined five pounds.  Commissioner Johnson now comes in and says,
M`Gregorius is not charged with being without a licence, but with assaulting
the trooper Lord--ridiculous!  This alters the case.  The trooper is called,
and says the old story about the execution of 'dooty,' that is,
licence-hunting.

A respectable witness takes his oath that he saw the trooper strike
the foreigner with his clenched fist, and knock him down.

The end of the story is in the Ballaarat tune, then in vogue:  "Fined 5 pounds;
take him away."




Chapter XX.



Public Meeting
Held at the Catholic Chapel, Bakery-hill, Wednesday, October 25th.


After a good deal of pretty intelligible talk about the 'helpless Armenian,'
the trooper Lord, and our respected priest; Thomas Kennedy, pouncing on
the thing of the day proposed:--

"That it is the opinion of this meeting that the conduct of Mr. Commissioner
Johnson towards the Rev. Mr. Smyth has been calculated to awaken the highest
feeling of indignation on the part of his devoted flock:  and to call upon
the government to institute an inquiry into his (gold-lace) character,
and to desire to have him at once removed from Ballaarat."

Carried unanimously.

The priest was requested to address the meeting.

Father Patricius Smyth, a native of Mayo, looks some thirty-five years old,
and belongs to the unadulterated Irish caste--half-curled hair, not abundant,
anxious semicircular forehead, keen and fiery eyes, altogether a lively
interesting head.  He is a Latin and Celtic scholar; and that excuses him
for his moderate proficiency in modern languages.  He was educated at Maynooth,
the eye-sore of Sabbatarians, and therefore believes it incontestable
that the authority conferred on him by the Bishop must needs be derived
from God; because the Bishop had been consecrated by the Pope, who--inasmuch
as a second branch of the Prince of the Apostles never was heard of at the time
of St. Augustin--is the successor of St. Peter, the corner stone on which
OUR LORD did build the Christian church, and our Lord's warrant is written
in St. John, chapter xiv, 24:  'Sermo quem auditis non est meus,
sed ejus qui misit me, nempe Patris.'  And so Father Smyth feels himself
entitled to adopt what was said of the Divine Master, 'Docebat enim eos
ut habens auctoritatem, non autem ut scribae.'  St. Matthew, chap. vii, 29.
Hence his preaching, though not remarkable for much eloquence,
does not lull to sleep.  There is no cant, and strange as it may appear,
there is little argument in his short-framed sentences, because they are
the decided opinion of his mind and the warm expression of his heart,
anxious for the salvation of his flock, as he believes he will be called
to account if any be lost.  He, out of civility, may not object to hear
what Paley or Butler has to say, but he scorns any conversation with Voltaire,
and would see the fellow burnt, as in the times of old.  His character
was never impeached, because his conduct is an example to all of the strength
of his faith.  Either at the altar or at the table he forgets not
that he belongs to the priesthood of Ireland, the 'proved gold' of the Catholic
church.  His song is, 'Erin, my country,' and 'I love thy green bowers,'
is the end of his story, which is a hint to me that this is not the place
to say more for the peace of John Bull.  Hence Ireland produced a
Daniel O'Connell, but has not yet got the repeal.

Father Smyth, in addressing the meeting, spoke with coolness and forbearance,
yet commendatory of the constitutional manner in which his congregation sought
redress from the government, for the insult offered them, through his person,
in the abuse of his servant by the trooper Lord.  On concluding his address,
he was warmly cheered, when the reverend gentleman and his friends adjourned
to the parsonage, to partake of some refreshments.




Chapter XXI.



Public Meeting
Held on Bakery-hill, November llth.


Political changes contemplated by THE REFORM LEAGUE.

1.  A full and fair representation.--Don't you wish you may get it?

2.  Manhood suffrage.--Thanks to the Eureka-boys, it costs now one pound.
Cheap!

3.  No property qualification of members for the Legislative Council.--The
identical thing for 'starring' on stumps to a fellow's heart's content.

4.  Payment of members.--That's the accommodation!

5.  Short duration of Parliament.--Increase the chances of accommodation,
that's it.

What was the freight per ton, of this sort of worn out twaddle imported
from old England?

How much does this new chum's bosh fetch in the southern markets,
and in the Victorian market particularly?

For my part I decline to answer, because I want to attend at the meeting.
J. B. Humffray, is the Secretary of the League; his name is going now
the round of the diggings; I wish to see the man in person; is he a great,
grand, or big man? that's the question.

When you seen JOHN BASSON HUMFFRAY, you have at once before you a gentleman,
born of a good old family; his manners confirm it, and his words indicate
an honest benevolent heart, directed by a liberal mind, entangled perhaps
by too much reading of all sorts, perplexed at the prosperity of the vicious,
and the disappointment of the virtuous in this mysterious world of ours,
but could never turn wicked, because he believes in the resurrection of life.
He is looking some thirty five years old, his person is well proportioned,
but inclining to John Bull's.  His prepossessing countenance is made up of
a fine forehead, denoting astuteness, not so much as shrewdness, how,
when and whither to shift his pegs in the battle of life; of a pair of eyes
which work the spell; of a Grecian nose; of a mouth remarkable for the
elasticity of the lips, that make him a model in the pronunciation
of the English language.  His voice, that of a tenor, undulating and clear,
never obstreperous, enables his tongue to work the intended charm,
when his head puts that member into motion; but the semi-earnestness
of his address, his cool sort of John Bull smile, betray that his heart
does not go always with his head.  Hence he has many enemies, and yet not one
ever dared to substantiate a charge against his character; he has as many
friends, but not one friend, because it is his policy ever to keep friendly,
with redcoats and gold-lace, at one and the same time as with blueshirts
and sou'-westers.

As I cannot possibly mean any thing dishonourable to our old mate,
John Basson Humffray, I may here relate what his foes do say of him.

Suppose any given square and the four pegs to be:


C-------D
|       |
|   W   |
|       |
B-------E

C., that is, the Camp; E., that is, the Eureka; D., that is, the doodledom
of red-tape., and B., that is, blue-shirts.

Let W., that is work, be the central point at C, E, and D, B.  Now:  John is
sinking at Eureka with the red cap; and Basson cracks some yabber-yabber at D,
that is, getting a sip of Toorak small-beer, as aforesaid.  Again:  when
Basson puts on a sou'-wester to go through the main-drift with blue-shirts,
then John feels entitled to tramp up to Camp, and there, somewhere not far off,
toast on the fourth of July a Doctor Kenworthy; soon after, however,
said Johnny bends his way to shake hands with Signor Raffaello, at the old peg
Eureka, and helps him to rock the cradle.  Further, to give evidence
of his consistency, Humffray himself will express his sorrow to Peter Lalor
for his loss of the left arm at the same peg Eureka; and, to atone for
past transgressions, he will soon after call in both the prodigal John
and yabbering Basson, and with his whole heart and voice, strike up,
'God Save the Queen,' at peg Camp.  As for bottoming his shaft at the central
point Work, that's a different thing altogether; and yet it must be admitted
that he is 'all there' in his claim, when the hole is bottomed, especially
if a drive is to be put in with his quill.  Sum total:--He was, is, and
ever will be, John Basson Humffray, Esquire, of Ballaarat;
'Honi soi qui mal y pense', because his friends want him in St. Patrick's Hall.




Chapter XXII.



Strike Off A Medal In Commemoration.


We are on Bakery-hill, though, attention.  Immediate objects of
the Reform League.

I.  An immediate change in the management of the goldfields, by disbanding
the Commissioners (undoubtedly the unanimous demand, or 'desire'--if the word
suit better the well-affected--of all blue-shirts).  Three cheers for Vern!
Go it hearty!  Fine fellow!  Legs rather too long!  Never mind.

II.  The total abolition of the diggers' and storekeeper's licence tax.
(Ah! ah! prick John Bull at his pounds, shillings and pence,
that's the dodge to make him stir.)

Three cheers for Humffray!  Hurrah!

The whole of the grand talk of these Bakery reformers leagued together on its
hill, can properly be framed in, on a 'copper;' thus doing justice to all.

Image.
LET
a course of
action be decided on
and carried out unswervingly
until the heel of our oppressors
be removed from our necks.
DON'T LET THE THING DROP THROUGH,
for want of co-operation and support
NOTA BENE.
2s. 6d. gentleman's ticket.
No admission for ladies at present.  'Durum sed levius fit Patientia.'
REMEMBER!
GOD HELPS HIM WHO HELPS HIMSELF (to the 2s. 6d.)
DO NOT LET
the word 'British' become a bye-word.
AND ABOVE ALL LEAVE OFF SINGING
'Britons never, never shall be slaves,'
until you leave fondling
the chains which
prove the song
a lie,
a mockery,
a delusion,
a snare.
----
Great works!




Chapter XXIII.



Ortica ensis:  Prima.


Here is a plant of Cayenne pepper, growing in those days on Ballaarat:
it withered some three months in limbo, but...oh yes, butt at it again.


'Ballaarat Times', November 18, 1854.

"THE REFORM LEAGUE.

"There is something strange, and to the government of this country,
something not quite comprehensible, in this League.  For the first time
in the southern hemisphere, a Reform League is to be inaugurated.
There is something ominous in this; the word 'League,' in a time of such
feverish excitement as the present, is big with immense purport (indeed!)
Indeed, it would ill become 'The Times' to mince in matter of such weighty
importance.  This League is not more or less that the germ of Australian
independence (sic).  The die is cast, and fate has stamped upon the movement
its indelible signature.  No power on earth can restrain the united might
and headlong strides for freedom of the people of this country, and we are
lost in amazement while contemplating the dazzling panorama of the Australian
future (Great works).  We salute the League [but not the trio, Vern, Kennedy,
Humffray], and tender our hopes and prayers for its prosperity [in the shape
of a goodly pile of half-crowns].  The League has undertaken a mighty task
[the trio'll shirk it though], fit only for a great people--that of changing
the dynasty of the country (Great works).  The League does not exactly
propose, nor adopt such a scheme, but we know what it means, the principles
it would inculcate, and that eventually it will resolve itself into
an Australian Congress." (Great Works!!)


Vote for
HUMFFRAY to be Auctioneer,
KENNEDY to be Bellman,
VERN to be Runner,
of the 'Starring league.'




Chapter XXIV.



Ortica ensis:  Secunda.


Out came the 'Ballaarat Times', Saturday, November 25, 1854.  Work was stopped
at every hole:  the miners left the deep and mobbed together round any reader
of the full report of the--


Trial of
MR. AND MRS. BENTLEY,
Hanse, and Farrel,
FOR THE MURDER OF
JAMES SCOBIE.
----
Supreme Court, Melbourne.
----
GUILTY! of Manslaughter.
Mrs. Bentley scot-free.

His Honour considered their conduct
was wanton and reckless.  He should
mark his sense of the outrage of which
they have been found guilty, by passing
on each of them a sentence of
THREE (!) YEARS' IMPRISONMENT
WITH HARD LABOUR ON THE ROADS.

Great Works!


Trial of
Fletcher, M`Intyre and Westerby,
for BURNING THE EUREKA HOTEL.
----
Supreme Court, Melbourne.
Criminal Sittings.
----
GUILTY, with a recommendation
to mercy!!

The Foreman of the Jury appended
the following rider to the verdict:--

"The jury feel, in giving their verdict
against the prisoners at the bar,
that in all probability, they (the jury)
should never have had that painful
duty to Perform, if those entrusted
with the government offices at Ballaarat
had done theirs properly."

His Honour said:  THE SENTENCE
of the Court is, that you,
M`Intyre be confined in H.M. gaol,
at Melbourne, for THREE MONTHS,
but I shall not subject you to labour.
(Great works!)  You, Fletcher, to four
months; and you, Westerby, to six
months confinement...
...The Executive was sufficiently
strong to punish those who outrage
the law! (Great works at Toorak!)


-------------

La vita in grammatica,
Facil declinazione;
La vita poi in pratica,
Storta congiugazione:
Della vita lo spello dal mondo sciolto,
Al mondo vivi, poiche non sei sepolto.




Chapter XXV.



Epistolam Hanc Misi, Tunc Bene, Nunc Valde Ad Opus.


Prepaid.
To W. H. ARCHER, Esq.
Acting Registrar General,
Melbourne.
Ballaarat Gold-fields,
Eureka, November 30, 1854.


My dear Mr. Archer,

I was in some anxiety about you; not receiving any answer to my letter
of the 17th October, and especially to that of the 22nd ditto.  I was
at Creswick's Creek, when I was informed that Father Smyth had a letter for me,
and last Monday I returned to Ballaarat, where I received, through
Messrs. Muir Brothers, your letter of the 20th October.  I am heartily glad
to learn that you are well, and now I suppose a few lines from me are
as welcome to you as ever.

Somehow or other, verging towards the fortieth year of my age, having
witnessed strange scenes in this strange world, very, very different from
my dream of youth, I feel now more disposed to the sober reality of the things
of this life.

However desponding and humiliating may be, as it really is, the sad
reflection, that at the enormous distance of sixteen thousand miles
from dear homes and dearer friends, people should be called upon to assemble,
NOT to thank God Almighty for any special mercy, or rejoice over the first
good harvest or vintage on this golden land; but melancholy is it to say,
for the old purpose, as in olden times in the old country,
'FOR THE REDRESS OF GRIEVANCES;' and so yesterday we had a monster meeting
on Bakery-hill, and I was the delegate of upwards of one thousand foreigners,
or 'aliens,' according to the superlative wisdom of your Legislative Council.

The Camp was prepared to stand for the Colonial Secretary Foster!  Yes;
you may judge of the conduct of some officers sent to protect the Camp
by the following:--

On Tuesday Evening (November 28th), about eight o'clock, the Twelfth Regiment
arrived from Melbourne.  The expert cleverness of the officer in command,
made the soldiers, riding in carts drawn by three horses each, cross the line
exactly at the going-a-head end of the Eureka.  An injudicious triumphant
riding, that by God's mercy alone, was not turned into a vast funeral.

From my tent, I soon heard the distant cries of 'Joe!' increasing in vehemence
at each second.  The poor soldiers were pelted with mud, stones, old stumps,
and broken bottles.  The hubbub was going on pretty desperate westward
of the Hill and WE had hard work to preserve the peace; but at the upper end
of the Hill, the game was going on upon a far more desperate scale.  It appears
that a party of Gravel-pits men had been in the bush for the purpose.
They stopped a cart, pulled the soldiers out, robbed them of their ammunition
and bayonets; in short, it was a hell of a row.  All of us camping on the Hill
were talking about this cowardly attack, when a detachment of said soldiers
came up again, and the officer, a regular incapable, that is, a bully,
with drawn sword began to swear at us, and called all of us a pack
of scoundrels.  He was, however, soon put to rights, by the whole of us
then present offering ourselves to look out for the missing soldiers;
and eventually, one of them was discovered in a deserted tent, another
was found in a hole lower down the Warrenheip Gully, and so on.
This disgraceful occurrence, coupled with the firing of guns and pistols, kept
up the whole of the night, did not give us cheering hopes for the next day.




Chapter XXVI.



The Monster Meeting.


Bakery-hill, Wednesday, November 29th.


(Letter continued.)

"All the diggings round about were deserted, and swelled the meeting,
the greatest I ever witnessed in this Colony.  At two o'clock there were
about ten thousand men present!  The Report of the Deputation appointed
by the League to wait upon his Excellency, relative to the release
of the three prisoners, M`Intyre, Fletcher, and Yorkie, was listened to
with great anxiety."


George Black was the man of the day, and was received by the people
with three hearty cheers.

From his outward appearance, one would take him for a parson, a Christian one,
I mean; not a prebendary or a bishop.  His English is elegant, and conscious
of having received an education, and being born a gentleman, he never
prostitutes his tongue to colonial phraseology.  His reading must have been
sober from his youth, for in conversation he indulges in neither cant
nor romance; though, in addressing the people, he may use a touch
of declamation stronger than argument.  From the paleness of his cheeks,
and the dryness of his lips, you might see that the spirit was indeed willing,
though the flesh was weak.  The clearness of his eyes, the sharpness
of his nose, the liveliness of his forehead, lend to his countenance
a decided expression of his belief in the resurrection of life.
His principles are settled, not so much because that is required
for the happiness of a good conscience, but because the old serpent
has crammed the ways of man with so many deceits in this world of vanity
and vexation of spirit, that a heart of the honesty of George Black,
cannot possibly have any sympathy with the crooked ways of rogues
and vagabonds; and so he is afflicted at their number and audacity,
especially in this Colony.  His disposition of mind makes him enthusiastic
for the virtuous, his benevolent heart prevents him from proceeding
to extremities with the vicious.  Hence the Diggers' Advocate, of which
he was the editor, though conducted with ability, failed, because he thought
that gold-diggers interested themselves with true religion, as laid down
in Saint James' Catholic Epistle; but he made a greater mistake in not taking
into consideration that men, though digging for gold, do still pretend
to some religious denomination or other.  However, let him now address
the Monster Meeting.




Chapter XXVII.



Divide Et Impera.




(Letter continued,)

"Mr. Black explained the results of his mission by stating, that
the Deputation was received by the Governor with much courtesy and urbanity,
and that personally his Excellency had no objection to grant the public prayer.
He further stated, that so far as he had an opportunity of judging
of the Governor's disposition, his Excellency was in favour of the people,
but that he was so surrounded by injudicious advisers, as to leave him
entirely impotent in state matters.  The great objection his Excellency
seemed to entertain against the Deputation's claim, was what is termed
want of courtesy in wording--for it must be understood that the Committee sent,
not to petition and pray, but demand the release of the state prisoners;
and the word demand was said to operate more against the Deputation
than the very object of their mission.  Upon hearing all these reasons,
it was proposed to adopt the form of a memorial, and petition the Governor;
but this proposition was furiously scouted, on the ground that it did not
comport with the dignity of the League, first to demand and afterwards to pray.

"Kennedy, along with the music of his rubbing the nails of the right hand
against those of the left, blathered away in a masterly style for the benefit
of the League.

"It was evident that there was a 'split' among the three Delegates;
yet Mr. Humffray, who had been received by His Excellency, in an interview
as a private digger, found favour among the assembly.  J. B. Humffray plainly
explained, and calmly made us understand, that Sir Charles was with us,
and was determined to put an end to our grievances; and that he had appointed
to this effect, a Commission of Inquiry, of popular men well known to us,
and His Excellency had made up his mind to 'act accordingly.' The feverish
excitement was subdued, and three hearty cheers were given for the
New Chum Governor, amid the discharging of several guns and pistols."


I must here interrupt the meeting, drop the letter, and hereby assert:-

lst.  Peter Lalor and myself, had never addressed any of the meetings,
before this monster one.

2nd.  Having made up my mind to return to Rome, the following Christmas,
in accordance with my brother's desire; I had to attend to my work; hence,
I had never taken any part in the agitation and to my knowledge,
Peter Lalor neither.

3rd.  I never was present at the Star Hotel and therefore, personally I know
nothing of the boisterous Committee of the vaunting Reform League held there.

Corolarium.--I am not dead yet!




Chapter XXVIII.



L'Union Fait La Force.


We had better proceed with the meeting first, and with the letter afterwards.

Peter Lalor proposed the following resolution:-

"That a meeting of the members of the Reform League be called at the
Adelphi Theatre, on next Sunday, at 2 o'clock, to elect a Central Committee;
and that each forty members have the power to elect one member for
the Central Committee."

Being an old acquaintance of Peter, I supported the above resolution.
He gave me his hand and pulled me up on the platform, from among the multitude.
The whole of that Wednesday morning, my tent on the Eureka had been
a regular Babel.  Foreigners from all quarters of the globe and of
the diggings, came to inquire from me what was the matter concerning
so much excitement as then prevailed on Ballaarat.  I translated for them
the news from our 'Ballaarat Times', or from The 'Geelong Advertiser's' clever
correspondent.  Thus, and thus alone, I became honourably their delegate,
and subsequently interpreter to Lalor, the Commander-in-Chief; and I hereby
express the hope that in time, Peter Lalor, though mutilated, may find
at Toorak, a little more credit for his testimony than did that infernal spy,
Goodenough.  Anyhow, for the present, 'Le Pere Duprat', a well-known old hand,
and respected French miner on Ballaarat, who was with me within the
Eureka Stockade, and whose proposed plan for the defence, I interpreted
to Lalor, is a living witness to the above.  We must, however, attend to
our Monster Meeting.




Chapter XXIX.



Heu Mihi! Sermo Meus, Veritas.


My friends had requested me to come forward at the meeting, and here is
my speech according to notes I had previously taken in my tent.

Gold-laced Webster, I challenge contradiction.

I came from old Europe, 16,000 miles across two oceans, and I thought
it a respectable distance from the hated Austrian rule.  Why, then,
this monster meeting to-day, at the antipodes?  We wrote petitions,
signed memorials, made remonstrances by dozens; no go:  we are compelled
to demand, and must prepare for the consequences.

The old style:  oppressors and oppressed.  A sad reflection, very sad
reflection, for any educated and honest man.

For what did we come into this colony?  'Chi sta bene non si move,'
is an old Roman proverb.  If then in old Europe, we had a bird in hand,
what silly fools we were to venture across two oceans, and try to catch
two jackasses in the bush of Australia!

I had a dream, a happy dream, I dreamed that we had met here together
to render thanks unto our Father in heaven for a plentiful harvest,
such that for the first time in this, our adopted land, we had our own food
for the year; and so each of us holding in our hands a tumbler of Victorian
wine, you called on me for a song.  My harp was tuned and in good order:
cheerfully struck up,

'Oh, let us be happy together.'

Not so, Britons, not so!  We must meet as in old Europe--old style--improved
by far in the south--for the redress of grievances inflicted on us,
not by crowned heads, but blockheads, aristocratical incapables,
who never did a day's work in their life.  I hate the oppressor, let him wear
a red, blue, white, or black coat.--And here certainly, I tackled
in right earnest with our silver and gold lace on Ballaarat, and called on all
my fellow-diggers, irrespective of nationality, religion, and colour,
to salute the 'Southern Cross' as the refuge of all the oppressed
from all countries on earth.--The applause was universal, and accordingly
I received my full reward:

Prison and Chains!  Old style.




Chapter XXX.



The Reform League, Grappling With The Right 'Stars'.


Monster Meeting continued:--

Proposed and seconded by blather reformers; of course, Vern had his go:--


"That this meeting being convinced that the obnoxious
licence-fee is an imposition and an unjustifiable tax
on free labour, pledges itself to take immediate steps
to abolish the same by at once burning all their licences;
that in the event of any party being arrested for having
no licence, that the united people will, under all
circumstances, defend and protect them."

"That this meeting will not feel bound to protect any
man after the 15th of December who shall not be a member
of the Reform League by that day."


The Rev. Mr. Downing proposed as an amendment, that the licences should not
be burned.  Although the rev. gentleman was heard with patience and respect,
a sullen excitement pervaded the whole assemblage while he spoke.
Those even of his most devoted followers were of the opinion that
his sentiments did not accord with the spirit of the times, and the result was
that the rev. gentleman's amendment fell to the ground.

Here must not be forgotten a peculiar colonial habit.  There was on the
platform a sly-grog seller, who plied with the black-bottle all the folks
there, and the day was very hot, the sun was almost burning.




Chapter XXXI.



Si Cessi Il Pianto, L'Ira Si Gusti.
Lo Schiavo Che Vuol Finir Le Sue Pene,
Vendetta Gridando Al Dio De Giusti,
Deve Schiantar Le Proprie Catene.
Cuore!  Si Vada, Vedasi, Si Vinca.  (bis.)


In Spite of all that, however, Timothy Hayes, the chairman--who by-the-bye,
discharged the duties of the chair in that vast assemblage, with ability
and tact, spoke like a man, as follows:--

"Gentlemen, many a time I have seen large public meetings pass resolutions
with as much earnestness and unanimity as you show this day; and yet,
when the time came to test the sincerity, and prove the determination
necessary for carrying out those resolutions, it was found then that
'the spirit, indeed, is willing, but the flesh is weak.'  Now, then,
before I put this resolution from the chair, let me point out to you
the responsibility it will lay upon you (hear, hear).  And so I feel bound
to ask you, gentlemen, to speak out your mind.  Should any member of the League
be dragged to the lock-up for not having the licence, will a thousand of you
volunteer to liberate the man?"

"Yes! Yes!"

"Will two thousand of you come forward?"

"Yes!  Yes!  Yes!"

"Will four thousand of you volunteer to march up to the Camp, and open
the lock-up to liberate the man?"

"Yes!  yes!" (the clamour was really deafening.)

"Are you ready to die?" shouted out our worthy chairman, stretching forth
his right hand, clenched all the while; "Are you ready to die?"

"Yes, Yes!  Hurrah!"

This general decided clamour put out Tim in such good spirits, that,
in spite of the heat of the sun and the excitement of the day, he launched
in the realm of crowned poets, and bawled as loud as if he wanted
the head-butler at Toorak to take him a quart-pot of smallbeer--

"On to the field, our doom is sealed,
To conquer or be slaves;
The sun shall see our country free.
Or set upon our graves."

(Great works!)

No one who was not present at that monster meeting, or never saw any
Chartist meeting in Copenhagen-fields, London, can possibly form an idea
of the enthusiasm of the miners of Ballaarat on that 29th of November.
A regular volley of revolvers and other pistols now took place, and a good
blazing up of gold-licences.  When the original resolutions had
all been passed, Mr. Humffray moved a vote of thanks to Mr. Ireland,
for his free advocacy of the state prisoners.  The meeting then dissolved,
many of them having previously burned their licences, and thus virtually
pledging themselves to the resolution adopted, which might be said to have been
the business of the day.  Nothing could exceed the order and regularity
with which the people, some fifteen thousand in number, retired.




Chapter XXXII.



Ecco Troncato Il Canto Per Ritornare Al Pianto.


My letter to Mr. Archer continued:-

Thanks be to God, the day passed 'unstained,' a glorious day for Victoria
when the SOUTHERN CROSS was first unfolded on Ballaarat; gathering round
itself all the oppressed of the world.

The whole purpose of the meeting was, that a Reform League be formed
and fully organised to carry out the clearance of all our grievances,
on the old style of the Corn Law League in Great Britain.

Next Sunday, we leaguers--( I took out a ticket of membership from Reynolds,
one of the treasurers, and paid my 2s. 6d.  on that very day, November 29th,
precisely, on the platform of the meeting)--have a meeting at two o'clock
at the Adelphi to organise the people and appoint a responsible
executive committee.  I am the old delegate to it, and therefore I shall
be able to give you, Mr. Archer, a full answer to your letter of the
24th instant.

Mark this, good reader!

1.  Meanwhile, privately, as an old Ballaarat hand, I beg respectfully
to convey to you, to employ your influence and reach the ears of
the Lieutenant Governor.  The licence-fee, as a tax, is perhaps a cause
of growling like any other tax in Great Britain or elsewhere in the world;
but, on the gold-fields, has become an 'abomination.' The inconvenience
in the Camp-insolence at our getting it, the annoyance and bore
for showing it, when asked by some 'pup' of a trap whilst at our work;
the imbecility and arrogance of so many commissioners and troopers
uselessly employed for the purpose, etc., etc.; make the gold-licence
an abomination to the honest digger.  The Vandemonian, you know, never dreamt
of taking out a licence, of course not.

Paramount is this grand consideration:  John Bull, rather of a doggish nature,
will growl to himself if left alone picking his bone:  the passport system
is a bone that he will not pick; no, no ways and under no shape whatever--
I know it by experience.

2.  A memorial to his Excellency for the release of the three prisoners
under sentence for burning the Eureka Hotel, is, through Humffray,
in course of signature.  It is our earnest desire that his Excellency
may show mercy; though it may appear, that he would do thus an act of justice
to the diggers, considering how rightly they guessed the Bentley affair.

3.  The whole pack, commissioners, troopers and traps on the Ballaarat Camp,
with the exception of magistrate Hackett, are detested by the diggers:
there will be eternal discontent as long as Rede and fraternity are
lodging over that way.  The whole Camp had better be changed at once,
and entrusted to good experienced hands and honest men.  Perhaps Sir Charles
may turn into a Diogenes in vain--'nil desperandum.' There are now and then
honest men to be found even in this colony.

Good reader, listen to me:  I shall tell you no lie:  do not lose sight
of the above letter:  I intend to give the end in the next chapter:
meanwhile, fill the pipe, let's have a 'blow' together.




Chapter XXXIII.



Mistero!  S'Apre Mendacia, Violente
Strada Maestra In Citta E Campagna:
La Verita, Se Docile, Quadagna
A Passo Lo Stradello Lentamente.


(Translated in the text of my first chapter.)

On Thursday morning, November 30th, at sunrise, I was at my work, as usual.

I assert, as an eye-witness, that most of the hands on the Eureka came
to their work, and worked as usual.

Whilst having a 'blow,' we would talk over again about the monster meeting
of yesterday, thus spinning a yarn in the usual colonial style.

The general impression was, that as soon as government knew in Melbourne
the real state of the excited feelings of the diggers, the licence-hunt
would be put a stop to.

Towards ten o'clock was my hour for a working-man's breakfast.
I used to retire to my tent from the heat of the mid-day, and on that same
Thursday I set about, at once, to end my letter to Mr. Archer,
because I was anxious to forward it immediately to Melbourne.

Good reader, I copy now, word for word, the scrawl then penned,
in great haste and excitement.


Thursday, November 30th, 1854.

Just on my preparing to go and post this letter, we are worried by the usual
Irish cry, to run to Gravel-pits.  The traps are out for licences,
and playing hell with the diggers.  If that be the case, I am not inclined
to give half-a-crown for the whole fixtures at the Camp.

I must go and see 'what's up.

Always your affectionate,
(Signed) CARBONI RAFFAELLO.
(To) W. H. ARCHER, Esq., Acting Registrar-General, Melbourne.

-----

Why this identical letter of mine--now in the hands of James Macpherson Grant,
M.L.C., Solicitor, Collins-street, where it will remain till Christmas
for inspection, to be then returned to the owner--was not produced
at my STATE TRIAL, was, and is still, a MYSTERY to me!

Let's run to Bakery-hill.




Chapter XXXIV.



Quos Vult Perdere Deus Dementat.


What's up? a licence hunt; old game.  What's to be done?  Peter Lalor was
on the stump, his rifle in his hand, calling on volunteers to 'fall in'
into ranks as fast as they rushed to Bakery-hill, from all quarters,
with arms in their hands, just fetched from their tents.  Alfred,
George Black's brother, was taking down in a book the names of divisions
in course of formation, and of their captains.

I went up to Lalor, and the moment he saw me, he took me by the hand saying,
"I want you, Signore:  tell these gentlemen, (pointing to old acquaintances
of ours, who were foreigners) that, if they cannot provide themselves
with fire-arms, let each of them procure a piece of steel, five or six inches
long, attached to a pole, and that will pierce the tyrants' hearts."
Peter of course spoke thus in his friendly way as usual towards me.
He was in earnest though.  The few words of French he knows, he can pronounce
them tolerably well, but Peter is no scholar in modern languages; therefore
he then appointed me his aide-de-camp, or better to say his interpreter,
and now I am proud to be his historian.

Very soon after this, all the diggers 'fell in' in file of two-a-breast,
and marched to the Eureka.

Captain Ross of Toronto, was our standard-bearer.  He hoisted down the
Southern Cross from the flag-staff and headed the march.

Patrick Curtain, the chosen captain of the pikemen, gave me his iron pike,
and took my sword to head his division; I 'fell in' with John Manning who also
had a pike, and all of us marched in order to the Eureka.

I assert as an eye-witness, that we were within one thousand in the rank
with all sort of arms, down to the pick and shovel.

We turned by the Catholic church, and went across the gully.  Of this I have
perfect recollection:  when the 'Southern Cross' reached the road leading to
the Eureka on the opposite hill, the file of two-a-breast crossing the gully,
extended backwards up to the hill where the Catholic church stands.
I took notice of the circumstance at the time.

We reached the hill where was my tent.  How little did we know that some
of the best among us had reached the place of their grave!  Lalor gave
the proper orders to defend ourselves among the holes in case the hunt
should be attempted in our quarters.

The red-tape was by far too cunning this time; redcoats, traps and troopers
had retired to the Ballaarat Camp, and wanted a 'spell.'

We determined, however, to put an end to their accursed licence-hunting,
mock riot-act chopping, Vandemonian shooting down our mates in Gravel-pits.




Chapter XXXV.



Ad Opus Concilium Statutum.


Peter Lalor, at our request, called in all the captains of division,
then present, and the chief persons who had taken part in the movement.
We entered a room some twelve feet square, in Diamond's store.  An old
European fox for such occasions, I took the right sort of precautions,
that no spy might creep in among us.  Black bottles and tumblers were placed on
the table, as a blind to any intruder; 'et nunc satis, profani vulgus causa,'
we proceeded to business.

Present--

1.  There was one, whom it is not prudent to mention just now.

2.  Near him was a thick, short-necked, burly individual; his phisiog
indicated at once that he was a priest-ridden.  I won't trouble myself
about his name.

3.  I'll begin with TIMOTHY HAYES.  He was born in Ireland, but his outward
appearance is that of a noble fellow--tall, stout, healthy-looking man,
giving himself the airs of a high-born gentleman, fit to rule, direct,
superintend, not to work; that's quite another thing.  Of a liberal mind,
however, and, above all, of a kind heart, and that covers a multitude of sins.

4.  EDWARD THONEN, a native of Elbertfeld, Prussia, five feet high,
some thirty years old, thin, but robust, of vigorous health, used no razor.
His eyes spoke determination and independence of character.  One day
in November, 1853, he called with his lemonade kegs at my hole in
Sailor's Gully.  A mate was served with a glass of lemonade--halloo!
he must help at the windlass just at the moment he was tendering payment,
and the shilling fell to the ground.  Some words passed to the effect
that six-pence a glass should be enough for lemonade.  Thonen asked
for his shilling; my mate directed him where the shilling lay; Thonen
would see him d----d first before picking up his money like a dustman,
and went away.  I sent that identical shilling (stamped 1844), along with
my little gold, to Rome; most astonishing!  I had the presentiment at the time
that I should have had occasion to relate the story.  There was no mate
on the gold-fields to match Thonen at chess-playing.  He would turn his head,
allow his opponent the move, and then he would give such a glance
on the chess board, that the right piece would jump to the right place,
as it were of its own accord.  Shrewd, yet honest; benevolent, but scorning
the knave; of deep thought, though prompt in action; Thonen possessed the head
belonging to that cast of men whose word is their bond.

5.  JOHN MANNING, born in Ireland, and an Irishman to the back-bone,
appeared above forty years of age.  His head was bald, perhaps from thinking
three times more than he ought; his forehead showed intelligence, but care
was there with the plough--the plough of dreaming too much of virtue,
believing the knaves are not the majority on earth.  He had come young
to this colony, had passed hard days, and so he had got the colonial habit,
now and then, 'Divo jucundo Baccho cultum prestare;' hence his hair was
fast turning grey.  He was a self-educated man, but wanted judgment
to discipline his fermenting brain, for the control of his heart,
which was good, honest, always warm, affectionate to man, woman, and child.
When he took his quill he was 'all there,' but soon manifested the sort
of reading of his youth; and experience, however hard, had not yet taught him
the sober reality of the things of the world--that is, he had remained
an Irishman, not John Bullised.

6.  Oh! you long-legged VERN! with the eyes of an opossum, a common nose,
healthy-looking cheeks, not very small mouth, no beard, long neck
for Jack Ketch, broad shoulders, never broken down by too much work,
splendid chest, long arms--the whole of your appearance makes you a lion
amongst the fair sex, in spite of your bad English, worse German,
abominable French.  They say you come from Hanover, but your friends have seen
too much in you of the Mexico-Peruvian.  You belong to the school of the
'Illuminated Cosmopolitans;' you have not a dishonest heart, but you believe
in nothing except the gratification of your silly vanity, or ambition,
as you call it.

7.  The next was a skinny bouncing curl who affected the tone and manners
of a Californian; he acted throughout the part of a coward, I scorn to mention
his name.

8.  Thank God there is among us a man; not so tall as thick, of a strong frame,
some thirty five years old, honest countenance, sober forehead, penetrating
look, fine dark whiskers.  His mouth and complexion denote the Irish,
and he is the earnest, well-meaning, no-two-ways, non-John-Bullised Irishman,
PETER LALOR, in whose eyes, the gaseous heroism of demagogues, or the knavery
of peg-shifters is an abomination, because his height of impudence consisted
in giving the diggers his hand, and leaving with them his arm in pawn,
for to jump the Ballaarat claim in St. Patrick's Hall.  More power to you
Peter!  Old chummy, smother the knaves! they breed too fast in this colony.

9.  Myself, CARBONI RAFFAELLO, DA ROMA; Member of the College of Preceptors
(1850), Bloomsbury-square, professor, interpreter and translator of
the Italian, French, Spanish and German Language into English or vice versa
late of 4, Castle-court, Birchin-lane, Cornhill, London; now, gold-digger
of Ballaarat, was present.

10.  PATRICK CURTAIN, an old digger, well known among us; at the time
a storekeeper; husband and father of a beloved family.  His caste is that
of the Irishman-Johnbull; tall, robust, some forty years old; he is no friend
to much yabber-yabber; of deep thinking, though very few can guess what
he is thinking of.  He smiles but never laughs to his heart's content.
Curtain was captain, and subsequently lieutenant of the pikemen division,
when they chose HANRAHAN for their captain.  Said pikemen division was among
the first that took up arms on Thursday, November 30th, immediately after
the licence-hunt.  It was formed on Bakery-hill, and received Lalor
on the stump with acclamation.  It increased hourly and permanently;
was the strongest division in the Eureka stockade; in comparison to others,
it stood the most true to the 'Southern Cross,' and consequently suffered
the greatest loss on the morning of the massacre.  Now, to explain how both
its gallant leaders escaped unhurt, safe as the Bank, so that a few weeks
afterwards, both were working happy and jolly in broad day-light
on Gravel-pits, within a rifle shot from the Camp, that would be a job
of a quite different kind just at present:  sufficient the trouble to mention;
that when I came out of gaol, I met them both in a remunerative hole
in Gravel-pits, as aforesaid.

11.  12.  There were two other individuals of the John-bull caste,
perhaps cross-breed, who had taken up arms in the cause of the diggers,
because their sly-trade was flagging; but, as a rotten case abides no handling,
I will let them pass.

Manning, handed over to Lalor the motion drawn up in my tent.  Here it is:-

Proposed by John Manning,

Seconded by Carboni Raffaello,

I.  That Peter Lalor has acted worthy of the miners of Ballaarat,
in organizing the armed men on Bakeryhill, against the wanton aggression
from the Camp this morning.

II.  That he be desired to call in all captains of division now present
on the spot, as well as other persons of importance, well-known good-wishers
to the cause of the diggers.

III.  That said parties constitute the council-of-war for the defence.

IV.  Lalor to be the president pro. tem.

V.  That he proceed at once to the election of the Commander-in-Chief,
by the majority of votes.

Lalor tore up immediately the slip of paper containing the above motion,
because he did not think it prudent to leave written things about in a
public store.  I transcribe it from the scrap left among the papers in my tent.




Chapter XXXVI.



Quousque Tandem Abutere, Toorak, Patientia Nostra?


Lalor rose, and said:

"Gentlemen, I find myself in the responsible position I now occupy,
for this reason.  The diggers, outraged at the unaccountable conduct
of the Camp officials in such a wicked licence-hunt at the point
of the bayonet, as the one of this morning, took it as an insult
to their manhood, and a challenge to the determination come to at
the monster meeting of yesterday.  The diggers rushed to their tents for arms,
and crowded on Bakery-hill.  They wanted a leader.  No one came forward,
and confusion was the consequence.  I mounted the stump, where you saw me,
and called on the people to 'fall in' into divisions, according to
the fire-arms they had got, and to chose their own captains out of the best men
they had among themselves.  My call was answered with unanimous acclamation,
and complied to with willing obedience.  The result, is, that I have been
able to bring about that order, without which it would be folly to face
the pending struggle like men.  I make no pretensions to military knowledge.
I have not the presumption to assume the chief command, no more than any other
man who means well in the cause of the diggers.  I shall be glad to see
the best among us take the lead.  In fact, gentlemen, I expected some one
who is really well known (J. B. Humffray?) to come forward and direct
our movement!  However, if you appoint me your commander-in-chief, I shall not
shrink; I mean to do my duty as a man.  I tell you, gentlemen, if once I pledge
my hand to the diggers, I will neither defile it with treachery, nor render it
contemptible by cowardice."


Brave Peter, you gave us your hand on the Eureka, and left there your arm:
an incontestable evidence of Lalor's Pledge.

Manning then proposed Raffaello, and pointed at his scars as an evidence
of his tiger-pluck against the hated Austrian rule, which was now attempted,
in defiance of God and man, to be transplanted into this colony.

I declined, because, during the past winter, I had over-tasked my physical
strength, and did not possess that vigour essential to such an emergency.
Confidence is the bond necessary between the soldier and his officer.
It was my decided opinion, however much a foreigner may be respected
on the gold-fields, that the right man should be taken from among Britons.

Vern here began a portentous lecture on military science, military discipline,
military tactics, and other sorts of militaryism, but his English was
so wretched, his ideas so sky-blathering, his martial ardour so knocking down,
that no one could make anything out of his blabberdom.

Of this I have perfect recollection.  He was boasting eternally of his German
rifle-brigade!  500 strong.  That he had this brigade he urgently asserted;
but where it was, that's the rub!

No possible inquiry from Lalor could get at the bottom of Vern's prodigal
brigade.  Is, then, the grand secret buried within Vern's splendid chest?
No; I mean to reveal it at four o'clock, Saturday, December 2nd.

Carboni Raffaello, who had heard heaps of cant in old Europe, did count
for nothing the oceanic military knowledge of Vern, in spite of his big
trail-sword, that made more jingling than enough.

I commended, in high terms, the conduct of Lalor during the morning,
and it was my impression that he possessed the confidence of the diggers
and should be their Commander-in-chief.

Thonen seconded the motion.  The first 'unnamed,' shewed approbation,
and the appointment was carried by a majority of eleven to one.

Peter Lalor thanked the council for the honour conferred on him,
assured the members that he was determined to prepare the diggers
to resist force by force.

It was perfectly understood, and openly declared, in this first council-of-war,
that we meant to organise for defence, and that we had taken up arms
for no other purpose.

The council adjourned to five o'clock in the evening.




Chapter XXXVII.



Lalor Stump, Bakery-Hill.


Brave LALOR--
Was found 'all there,'
With dauntless dare,
His men inspiring;
To wolf or bear,
Defiance bidding,
He made us swear,
Be faithful to the Standard,  )
For Victory or Death!         ) (bis)

-----

On that Thursday, November 30th, more memorable than the disgraced Sunday,
December 3rd, the SUN was on its way towards the west:  in vain some scattered
clouds would hamper its splendour--the god in the firmament generously
ornamented them with golden fringes, and thus patches of blue sky far off
were allowed to the sight, through the gilded openings among the clouds.

The 'SOUTHERN CROSS' was hoisted up the flagstaff--a very splendid pole,
eighty feet in length, and straight as an arrow.  This maiden appearance
of our standard, in the midst of armed men, sturdy, self-overworking
gold-diggers of all languages and colours, was a fascinating object to behold.
There is no flag in old Europe half so beautiful as the 'Southern Cross'
of the Ballaarat miners, first hoisted on the old spot, Bakery-hill.
The flag is silk, blue ground, with a large silver cross, similar to the one
in our southern firmament; no device or arms, but all exceedingly chaste
and natural.

Captain Ross, of Toronto, was the bridegroom of our flag, and sword in hand,
he had posted himself at the foot of the flag-staff, surrounded by
his rifle division.

Peter Lalor, our Commander-in-chief, was on the stump, holding with his
left hand the muzzle of his rifle, whose butt-end rested on his foot.
A gesture of his right hand, signified what he meant when he said,
"It is my duty now to swear you in, and to take with you the oath
to be faithful to the Southern Cross.  Hear me with attention.  The man who,
after this solemn oath does not stand by our standard, is a coward in heart.

"I order all persons who do not intend to take the oath,
to leave the meeting at once.

"Let all divisions under arms 'fall in' in their order
round the flag-staff."

The movement was made accordingly.  Some five hundred armed diggers advanced
in real sober earnestness, the captains of each division making the military
salute to Lalor, who now knelt down, the head uncovered, and with the
right hand pointing to the standard exclaimed a firm measured tone:

"WE SWEAR BY THE SOUTHERN CROSS TO STAND TRULY BY EACH OTHER,
AND FIGHT TO DEFEND OUR RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES."

An universal well rounded AMEN, was the determined reply; some five hundred
right hands stretched towards our flag.

The earnestness of so many faces of all kinds of shape and colour;
the motley heads of all sorts of size and hair; the shagginess of so many
beards of all lengths and thicknesses; the vividness of double the number
of eyes electrified by the magnetism of the southern cross; was one of those
grand sights, such as are recorded only in the history of
'the Crusaders in Palestine.'




Chapter XXXVIII.



Un Bon Calcio, E La Canaglia,
Stronga Va Come La Paglia.


The drill afterwards was gone through with eagerness.

Another scene, though of a different kind all together, was going on
at a corner of the above picture.

Judas Iscariot, 'Goodenough,' was among us, in the garb of a fossiker;
he appeared to me, then, to be under the influence of drink;
so Vandemonian-like were his shouts about standing up and fighting for rights
and liberties; and burning down the camp in a blaze like the late Eureka Hotel.

Mind good reader, I tell you no joke, I am not in humour just now to spin
a yarn.--I wished to shame the fellow for his villainy on such a solemn
occasion.  The fellow persisted in his drunken shouts.  I lost my temper,
and gave the scoundrel such a respectable kick, in a less respectable region,
with a most respectable boot of mine, that it served me right when both
my new watertight boots were robbed from my shins by Goodenough's satellites
on the subsequent Sunday, at the Ballaarat Camp.

The Thursday's sun is setting:  we returned to the Eureka.  I had to attend
the 'Council for the Defence.'




Chapter XXXIX.



Disciplina, Suprema Lex In Bello.


In the afternoon, our camp on the Eureka was enclosed in by slabs,
near-handy thrown down at random.  All diggers who had been able to procure
fire-arms kept coming in, in right earnest, and formed new divisions.
The pikemen grew stronger and stronger.  Drilling was tolerably progressing.
We were of all nations and colours.  Lalor gave me his consent and order
to direct all foreigners in their respective language, however little
they knew of the English, to fall in in divisions according to the arms
they had got; and here I solemnly declare, to whomsoever it may concern,
that up to four o'clock of Saturday there was not one single division
distinguished by nationality or religion.

The armed men numbered now (six o'clock) about five hundred.

Vern's gall was fermenting, but on PETER LALOR being proclaimed
Commander-in-chief, the appointment was ratified by hurrah! from the diggers.

There was such a decided intention to do 'something' with the strong arm,
and at once, that I was called on the stump.  I requested the diggers
to give us time for deliberation, and pledged my word that I would inform them
of the result.  'Go a-head!  Great works!' was the shout.




Chapter XL.



Beati Qui Sunt Pacifici, Quoniam Filii Dei Vocabuntur.


It was dark:  myself took the light in the council room.

Father P. Smyth and Mr. George Black were present; both looking serious
and anxious.

All of us were much concerned, and felt the responsibility of our position.
By this time the diggers from all parts had swelled to the number of
eight hundred.  They were not clamorous, they wanted to know what
was determined on by the leaders.

Proposed by Black, seconded by Manning...That a deputation from
the armed diggers, should be forthwith sent to the Camp--

1.  To demand--that was our temper in those days--the immediate release
of those diggers who had been dragged to the lock-up in the morning hunt,
for want of the licence.

2.  To demand from Commissioner Rede a pledge not to come out any more
for licence-hunting.

Two of us were to form the deputation, and proceed at once.

Father Smyth proposed Mr. Black, Lalor proposed Signor Raffaello:
agreed to unanimously.  This news, being made public to the diggers,
was well received by all; and the council kept sitting until our return.

The deputation was accompanied by Father Smyth.  It was a starry night,
and rather cold; the moon shone in all its southern splendour.
On approaching the main road, the noisy band of Row's Circus, and the colonial
cursing and shouting from inveterate grog-bibbers, forced into my mind
the meditation, 'Unde bella et pugna infer vos?' etc.--James, chap. iv.

We met here and there several groups, who were anxiously discussing the events
of the day, and the probable consequences.  Mr. Black kindly and plainly
informed them of our mission.  On reaching the bridge, we found it guarded
by the police.  Father Smyth had an easy pass, and went by himself to speak
first at head-quarters, for the safety of our persons.




Chapter XLI.



The Eureka Stockade.
The Consequence Of Some Pirates Wanting On Quarter-Deck A Rebellion.



At last the deputation was before King Rede, whose shadow by moonshine,
as he held his arm a la Napoleon, actually inspired me with reverence;
but behold! only a marionette was before us.  Each of his words,
each of his movements, was the vibration of the telegraphic wires directed
from Toorak.  He had not a wicked heart; some knew him for his benevolence,
and he helped many an honest digger out of trouble.  Once I had seen him
with my mate, Paul Brentani, about manufacturing bricks from the splendid clay
of Gravel-pits.  Mr. Rede received us as a gentleman, and, by way of
encouragement, said to Paul, 'Je veux bien vous aider, car tout est encore
a batir a Ballaarat, et il nous faut des briques--revenez me voir.'
And yet, on the gold-field, this man was feared by the few who could not
help it, respected by the many--detested by all, because he was the
Resident Commissioner--that is, all the iniquities of officialdom at the time
were indiscriminately visited on his gold-lace cap, which fact so infatuated
his otherwise not ordinary brains, that they protruded through his eyes,
whenever he was sure he had to perform a dooty.  I would willingly
turn burglar to get hold of the whole of the correspondence between him
and Toorak.  I feel satisfied I would therein unravel the mystery
of the Eureka massacre.

Rede, after all, was neither the right man, nor in the right place,
for Sir Charles Hotham.

Sub-inspector Taylor, with his silver-lace cap, blue frock, and jingling sword,
so precise in his movement, so Frenchman-like in his manners,
such a puss-in-boots, after introducing the deputation, placed himself
at the right of the Commissioner, and never spoke; though, on accompanying us
from the bridge, having recognised me, he said, "We have been always
on good terms with the diggers, and I hope we may keep friends still;"--
and gave me a smile of sincerity.  He, perhaps, was ignorant, as well as
the deputation, that, on quarter-deck, some pirates wanted a rebellion.

At the left of Mr. Rede, there was a gentleman who inspired us with confidence.
His amiable countenance is of the cast that commands respect, not fear.
The ugliness of his eyes prejudices you against him at first; let him,
however, turn them upon you in his own benevolent way, you are sure
they mean no harm:  within a pair of splendid whiskers, of the finest blond,
there is such a genteel nose and mouth, such a fine semi-serious forehead,
that the whole is the expression of his good sound heart, that loves truth,
even from devils.  It was Charles Henry Hackett, police magistrate.

The place of our palaver was exactly one yard down hill, near the old gum tree,
in front of the present Local Court.

Mr. Rede asked our names, and cautioned us that our message would be reported
at head-quarters.  He who had a gang of the vilest spies at his bidding,
perhaps, indeed, forced upon him, now suspected us as such, and told us
pretty plainly, that he thought it not prudent to take us to his residence,
the camp being prepared against a supposed attack from the diggers.




Chapter XLII.



Invanum Laboravimus.


Mr. Black began, in plain and straightforward language, to make
a truthful statement of the exasperated feelings of the diggers, courageously
censuring the conduct of the Commissioner in his licence-hunt of the morning,
reminding him of the determination with which the diggers had passed
the resolutions at the monster meeting of yesterday.  "To say the least,
it was very imprudent of you, Mr. Rede, to challenge the diggers at the point
of the bayonet.  Englishmen will not put up with your shooting down
any of our mates, because he has not got a licence."

Mr. Rede:  "Now Mr. Black, how can you say that I ever gave such an order
as to shoot down any digger for his not having a licence?" and he proceeded
to give his version of the occurrence.  Master Johnson wanted a little play,
and rode licence-hunting; was met with impertinent shouts of "Joe, Joe,"
and reported a riot.  Daddy Rede must share in the favourite game,
and rode to crack the riot act.  The red-coats turned out.  The diggers
mobbed together among the holes, and several shots were fired at the traps.
The conclusion:  Three of the ring-leaders of the mob had been pounced upon,
and were safe in chokey.

Mr. Black manfully vindicated the diggers, by observing how they had been
insulted; that Britons hated to be bullied by the soldiery, and concluded
by stating our first 'demand.'

Mr. Rede, startled at our presumption, breathed out "Demand!--First of all,
I object to the word, because, myself, I am only responsible to government,
and must obey them only:  and secondly, were those men taken prisoners
because they had not licences?  Not at all.  This is the way in which
the honest among the diggers are misled.  Any bad character gets up
a false report:  t soon finds it way in certain newspapers, and the
Camp officials are held up as the cause of all the mischief."

Mr. Black would not swallow such a perfidious insinuation.

Mr. Rede continued:  "Now, Mr. Black, look at the case how it really stands.
Those men are charged with rioting; they will be brought before the magistrate,
and it is out of my power to interfere with the course of justice."

Mr. Hackett spoke his approbation to the Commissioner.

Mr. Black:  "Will you accept bail for them to any amount you please
to mention?"

A consultation ensued between Rede and Hackett.  Bail would be accepted
for two of the prisoners.  Father Smyth would bring the required sureties
tomorrow morning.

Mr. Black proceeded to our second demand.

Mr. Rede took that for a full stop; and launched into declamation:
"What do you think, gentlemen, Sir Charles Hotham would say to me,
if I were to give such a pledge?  Why Sir Charles Hotham would have at once
to appoint another Resident Commissioner in my place!" and concluded
with the eternal cant of all silver and gold lace, "I have a dooty to perform,
I know my duty, I must 'nolens volens' adhere to it."

In vain Mr. Black entered the pathetic; and expostulated with the Commissioner,
who had it in his power to prevent bloodshed.

Mr. Rede:  "It is all nonsense to make me believe that the present agitation
is intended solely to abolish the licence.  Do you really wish
to make me believe that the diggers of Ballaarat won't pay any longer
two pounds for three months?  The licence is a mere cloak to cover
a democratic revolution."

Mr. Black acknowledged that the licence fee, and especially the disreputable
mode of collecting it at the point of the bayonet, were not the only grievances
the diggers complained of.  They wanted to be represented in the
Legislative Council; they wanted to 'unlock the lands.'

Carboni Raffaello, who had yet not opened his mouth, said:  "Mr. Rede,
I beg you would allow me to state, that the immediate object of the diggers
taking up arms, was to resist any further licence-hunting.  I speak
for the foreign diggers whom I here represent.  We object to the Austrian rule
under the British flag.  If you would pledge yourself not to come out
any more for the licence, until you have communicated with Son Excellence,
I would give you my pledge...--(I meant to say, that I was willing
to pledge myself, and try if possible to assuage the excitement,
and wait till 'our Charley' had sent up a decided answer...")--but I was
instantly interrupted by Father Smyth who addressed me imperatively:
"Give no pledge:  sir, you have no power to do so."

This interruption, which I perfectly recollect, and the circumstance that
on our going and returning, the said Father Smyth continually kept on a 'sotto
voce' conversation with Mr. Black only, were, and are still, mysteries to me.

Mr. Rede, who had not failed to remark the abruptness with which
Father Smyth had cut me short; joined both his hands, and with the stretched
forefinger tapping me on both hands, which were clenched as in prayer,
addressed to me these identical remarkable words, "My dear fellow,
the licence is a mere watchword of the day, and they make a cat's-paw of you."

Mr. Black undertook my defence:  the words above stuck in my throat, though.

Mr. Hackett, on being consulted, assented that Mr. Rede could promise us
to take into consideration the present excited feelings of the diggers,
and use his best judgment as to a further search for licences on the morrow.

Mr. Rede:  "Yes, yes; but, understand me, gentlemen.  I give no pledge."

The usual ceremonies being over, Sub-inspector Taylor kindly escorted us
to the bridge, gave the pass-word, and to go--just as any one else will go
in this land, who puts his confidence in red-tape--disappointed.




Chapter XLIII.



La Volpe Cambia Il Pelo, Ma Non La Pelle;
Cambia La Pelle Il Serpe, Non Il Veleno:
Il Cane Non Abbaia Col Ventre Pieno;
Vestesi Il Lupo In Pecora Tra Liagnelle.
Antica Storia;
Ma Senza Gloria.


By this time, the main road was crowded.  The men were anxiously waiting
to know our success.  Mr. Black calmed their excitement as kindly
as circumstances admitted.  We returned to our camp at the Eureka.  Mr. Black
rendered an account of our mission with that candour which characterises him
as a gentleman.  I wished to correct him in one point only, and said,
my impression was, that the Camp, choked with red-coats, would quash
Mr. Rede's 'good judgment,' get the better of his sense, if he had any
of either, and that he would come out licence-hunting on an improved style.

Peter Lalor adjourned the meeting to five o'clock in the morning.




Chapter XLIV.



Accingere Gladio Tuo Super Femur Tuum.


On Friday, December 1st, the sun rose as usual.  The diggers came in armed,
voluntarily, and from all directions:  and soon they were under drill,
as the day before.  So far as I know, not one digger had turned to work.
It may have happened, that certain Cornishmen, well known for their
peculiar propensity, of which they make a boast to themselves, to pounce
within an inch of their neighbour's shaft, were not allowed to indulge in
'encroaching.' This, however, I assert as a matter of fact, that the Council
of the Eureka Stockade never gave or hinted at any order to stop the
usual work on the gold-field.

Towards ten o'clock, news reached our camp that the red coats were under arms,
and there would be another licence-hunting.

The flames did not devour the Eureka Hotel with the same impetuosity
as we got up our stockade.  Peter Lalor gave the order:  Vern had the charge,
and was all there with his tremendous sword.  "Wo ist der Raffaello!
Du, Baricaden bauen," and all heaps of slabs, all available timber
was soon higgledy-piggledy thrown all round our camp.  Lalor then gave
directions as to the position each division should take round the holes,
and soon all was on the 'qui vive.'

Had Commissioner Rede dared to rehearse the farce of the riot-act
cracking as on Gravel-pits, he would have met with a warm reception
from the Eureka boys.  It was all the go that morning.

No blue or red coat appeared.--It was past one o'clock:  John Bull
must have his dinner.  Lalor spoke of the want of arms and ammunition,
requested that every one should endeavour to procure of both as much
as possible, but did certainly not counsel or even hint that stores
should be pressed for it.

A German blacksmith, within the stockade was blazing, hammering and pointing
pikes as fast as his thick strong arms allowed him:  praising the while
his past valour in the wars of Mexico, and swearing that his pikes would fix
red-toads and blue pissants especially.  He was making money as fast
any Yankee is apt on such occasions, and it was a wonder to look at
his coarse workmanship, that would hardly stick an opossum, though his pikes
were meant for kangaroos and wild dogs.




Chapter XLV.



Populus Ex Terra Crescit:  Multitudo Hominum Est Populus;
Ergo, Multitudo Hominum Ex Terra Crescit.


Between four and five o'clock of same afternoon, we became aware of
the silly blunder, which proved fatal to our cause.  Some three or four hundred
diggers arrived from Creswick-creek, a gold-field famous for its pennyweight
fortunes--grubbed up through hard work, and squandered in dissipation
among the swarm of sly-grog sellers in the district.

We learned from this Creswick legion that two demagogues had been stumping
at Creswick, and called the diggers there to arms to help their brothers
on Ballaarat, who were worried by scores, by the perfidious hounds of the Camp.
They were assured that on Ballaarat there was plenty of arms, ammunitions,
forage, and provisions, and that preparations on a grand scale were making
to redress once for all the whole string of grievances.  They had only
to march to Ballaarat, and would find there plenty of work, honour, and glory.

I wonder how honest Mr. Black could sanction with his presence,
such suicidal rant, such absurd bosh of that pair of demagogues,
who hurried down these four hundred diggers from Creswick, helpless, grog-worn,
that is, more or less dirty and ragged, and proved the greatest nuisance.
One of them, MICHAEL TUEHY, behaved valiantly and so I shall say no more.

Of course something must be done.  Thonen was the purveyor.  The Eureka butcher
on the hill gave plenty of meat, and plenty of bread was got from all
the neighbouring stores, and paid for.  A large fire was lit in the middle
of the stockade, and thus some were made as comfortable as circumstances
admitted; others were quartered at the tents of friends; the greater part,
soon guessing how they had been humbugged, returned to their old quarters.

Arms and ammunition were our want.  Men were there enough; each and all ready
to fight:  such was the present excitement; but blue and red coats cannot
be driven off with fists alone.  Lalor gave all his attention to the subject,
but would not consent yet to press stores for it.

Vern was perpetually expecting every moment his German Rifle Brigade.
Have patience till to-morrow.

In the evening a report was made to the Council, that a reinforcement
of soldiers from Melbourne was on the road.  Captains Ross and Nealson
hastened with their divisions across the bush to intercept the expected troops,
so as to get at their arms and ammunition.  All proved in vain.

When a revolution explodes as conspired and planned by able leaders,
it is usually seen that it was their care from the very beginning,
that arms and ammunition should be at hand when and wherever required;
while usury, ambition, or vengeance lavishly provide the money to render
the revolution popular:  but we had never dreamed of making any preparation,
because we diggers had taken up arms solely in self-defence; and as up to
Saturday the Council of the Eureka Stockade counted in the majority honest men,
themselves hard-working diggers, they would not turn burglars
or permit anybody to do so in their name.

Truly, I heard from Manning, that a certain committee kept on their
hallucinated yabber-yabber at the Star Hotel.  I never was there,
and know nothing about Star blabs.  They, with the exception of Vern,
were not with us, thank God; up to Saturday four o'clock any how.




Chapter XLVI.



Non Irascimini.


Saturday morning.  The night had been very cold, we had kept watch for fear
of being surprised; every hour the cry, was "The military are coming."

Vern had enlarged the stockade across the Melbourne road,
and down the Warrenheip Gully.

Suppose, even that all diggers who had fire arms had been present and plucky,
yet no man in his right senses will ever give Vern the credit
for military tactics, if that gallant officer had thought that an acre
of ground on the surface of a hill accessible with the greatest ease
on every side, simply fenced in by a few slabs placed at random,
could be defended by a handful of men, for the most part totally destitute
of military knowledge, against a disciplined soldiery, backed by swarms
of traps and troopers.

Such, however, was our infatuation, that now we considered the stockade
stronger, because it looked more higgledy-piggledy.




Chapter XLVII.



Non Nobis, Non Nobis, Sed Pax Vobiscum.


It was eight o'clock.  Drilling was going on as on the previous day.
Father Smyth came inside the stockade:  it was my watch.  He looked
very earnest, a deep anxiety about the hopelessness of our struggle,
must have grieved his Irish heart.  He obtained permission from Lalor
to speak to those under arms, who belonged to his Congregation.
Vern consented, and Manning announced it to the men.  Father Smyth told them,
that the government Camp was under arms, some seven or eight hundred strong;
that he had received positive information, that government had sent
other reinforcements from Melbourne, which would soon reach Ballaarat;
warned them against useless bloodshed; reminded them that they were Christians;
and expressed his earnest desire to see all of them at Mass
on the following (Sunday) morning.

Father Smyth, your advice was kindly received; if it did not thrive,
was it because you sowed it on barren ground?

The following document may in time help to bring forth truth to light:-


Colonial Secretary's Office,
Melbourne, lst December, 1854.
Rev.  Sir,

In acknowledging the receipt of your letter of
yesterday's date, I am desired by his Excellency
to thank you for the earnest efforts which, in your
professional calling, you are making to allay the
disturbances.  Unless the government enforce the
laws which may be in operation, disorder and
licentiousness must prevail.

You know a commission is issued for the purpose
of inquiring into the state and condition of the
digging population:  until they make their report,
the laws his Excellency found in force must be
obeyed.

I have the honour to be, Rev.  Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
J. MOORE, A.C.S.
The Rev.  Patrick Smyth,
Catholic Priest, Ballaarat.




Chapter XLVIII.


The Things We Ardently Wish For In This Life, Either Never Come To Pass,
Or If They Do It Is Too Late.  Hence, 'Better Late Than Never.'


The whole of the morning passed off as quietly as any well wisher to our cause
could desire.  Towards twelve o'clock it was our decision that licence-hunting
was over, for the day any how, since no digger recollected a search for licence
taking place on a Saturday afternoon.  Our talk was of the coming meeting
of the reform league at two o'clock on Sunday, at the Adelphi, as announced
at the monster meeting on Wednesday.

The impression was almost general, that 'Charley' would soon dismiss
the hated brood of our commissioners, and things would then be 'all right.'
'Off to get a bite,' was the pass-word.

I assert as a matter of fact, and a living eye-witness, that between
one and two o'clock on Saturday, December 2nd, 1854, the Eureka stockade
was comparatively deserted.  Those who remained (some one hundred) were such,
as either had a long distance to go to reach their tents, and the day
was very hot, or such as had no tent or friend on Ballaarat.  I took notice
of this very circumstance from my tent, the second from the stockade,
on the hill, west, whilst frying a bit of steak on the fire of my tent chimney,
facing said stockade:  Manning was peeling an onion.  I transcribe the above
from the identical note I had taken down on my diary, at the identical hour
aforesaid, and can afford to challenge contradiction.




Chapter XLVIX.



Taedet Animam Meam Vitae Meae.


The news of our private, though never acknowledged, disbandment
must soon have reached the Camp.

THE LORD GOD OF ISRAEL UNRAVEL THE MYSTERY.

What a nonsense of mine to endeavour to swell up the Eureka stockade
to the level of a Sebastopol!!

Good reader, I have to relate the story of a shocking murder, a disgrace
to the Christian name.

I am a Catholic, and believe in the life everlasting.  On the day of judgment
it will go milder with the Emperor Nicholas, than with the man
whoever he may be, that prompted and counted on the Eureka massacre
on the Sunday morning, December 3rd, 1854.

At four o'clock, the diggers crowded again towards the stockade.
The divisions of Ross and Nealson had returned from their excursions
and were under arms.  The scene became soon animated, and the usual drilling
was pushed on with more ardour than ever.

John Basson Humffray, of whom nothing was seen or heard since the previous
Wednesday, now introduced, through a letter in his own handwriting;
addressed 'To the Commander-in-Chief of the armed diggers, Eureka,'
a Doctor Kenworthy, as surgeon, because he (Humffray) feared that a collision
between the diggers and the military would soon take place.

Peters, the spy, was at the same time within the stockade.

The 'surgeon' had his Yankee face under a bell-top (French hat):  he entered
into conversation with me in person.  I had my sword in hand, and was on watch.
We began to talk about MAZZINI and Captain FORBES:  this latter,
a brave American officer, fought in the late struggle at Rome (1848).
I perfectly recollect, that, pointing with a smile to our barricade,
I told this Kenworthy, we had thrown them up for our defence against
licence-hunting.  There is a living witness to the above circumstance,
a countryman of mine, whose name I do not remember just now, but he wore
at the time a red shirt, with picks and shovels all over it.

Previous to this, Vern, whose silly vanity would by no means allow him
to put up with his not having been elected Commander-in-Chief, all on a sudden
cried out in his sort of bombast, "Here they are coming, boys:  now I will
lead you to death or victory!"--actually a band of men was tramping
full speed towards the stockade.




Chapter L



Narravere Patres Nostri
Et Nos Narravimus Omnes.


Was it then the long, long-looked for German Rifle Brigade?  Here is
it's four-horned name--I copy from a slip of paper I wrote in pencil
on that very Saturday, as the name was too long and difficult for me
to remember--'The Independent Californian Rangers' Revolver Brigade.'

I should say they numbered a couple of hundred, looking Californian enough,
armed with a Colt's revolver of large size, and many had a Mexican knife
at the hip.

Here is the very circumstance when M`Gill made his appearance for the first
time within the stockade; I recollect perfectly well the circumstance
when a Mr. Smith, of the American Adams's Express, was holding the bridle
of the horse, from which said M`Gill dismounted.

James M`Gill is of the breed on the other side of the Pacific.  He is thought
to have been educated in a military academy, and certainly, he has the manners
of a young gentleman of our days.  He is rather short, not so much
healthy-looking as wide awake.  'What's up?' is his motto.  This colony
will sober him down, and then he will attend more to 'what's to be done.'
His complexion bears the stamp of one born of a good family, but you can read
in the white of his eyes, in the colouring of his cheeks, in the paleness
of his lips, that his heart is for violence.  When he gets a pair
of solid whiskers, he may pass for a Scotchman, for he has already a nose
as if moulded in Scotland.  He speaks the English language correctly,
and when not prompted by the audacity of his heart, shows good sense,
delicate feelings, a pleasing way of conversation.  His honour was impeached
by Vern, who never came up to the scratch, though; witness, Mr. John Campbell,
of 'The Age' office.

When a man is dead, there and then he is himself the horrible evidence
of corruption; but, as long as he lives there is hopes for fair play,
and hear his evidence on the resurrection of life:  hence the moral courage
to assert the truth, shuts out the physical strength for blather to shampoo
the lie; and an honest upright man of education and a Christian leaves
'duelering' to fools.

M`Gill is not wicked in heart, though he may not yet have settled-principles.
If this world be such a puzzle even for grey-heads, who have seen enough of it,
what then must it be for one, come out of College and learning life
on the gold-fields?  Hence, if I say that he helped with others to draw
the chestnuts out of the Eureka Stockade, for some old Fox, I cannot
offend him.--Who was the accursed old Fox?  Patience, there is a God.--
When I was in gaol, I was not vexed at hearing him at liberty and happy:
I could not possibly wish my misery to any one; but his boast on Ballaarat
that his friend Dr. Kenworthy had procured him a 'written free pardon'
did smother me with bitterness.




Chapter LI.



Tota Domus Duo Sunt, Iidem Parentque Jubentque!


A confusion ensued which baffles description; marching, counter-marching,
orders given by everybody, attended to by nobody.  This blustering concern,
when brought forward on the stage at the State Trials, appeared so much
to the heart's content of his Honour, of his and my learned friend Mr. Ireland,
that I must offer it here, 'nolens volens', for the confirmation of the
Cracker-of-high-treason-indictments' approbation.

Thomas Allen examined.--(See Report of the Nigger-Rebel State Trial,
in 'The Age', February 24th, 1855.)

"This witness was so very deaf that the Attorney-General
had actually to bawl out (oh! pity the lungs!) the
questions necessary to his examination.  He stated,
he kept the Waterloo coffee-house and store at the
Eureka.  He had just returned from Melbourne on the
Saturday, December 2nd.  He heard inside the stockade
the word to 'fall in' for drill.  Saw them go through
several military evolutions.  They did not exactly go
through them in a military manner, but in the way in
which what call an 'awkward squad' might do.--
(I believe you, Old Waterloo; go a-head).  He had been
at the battle of Waterloo, and knew what military
evolutions were.  Saw one squad with pikes and another
with rifles.  He heard one of them say, 'Shoulder poles,'
then he said, 'Order poles,' 'Ground arms,'
'Stand at ease,' 'Pick up poles,' 'Shoulder arms,'
'Right face,' 'Quick march,' 'Right counter march,'
and they were then marched for more than two hours.
After that he saw them 'fall in three deep,' and were
then told (by Captain Hanrahan) to prepare to
'receive cavalry,' and 'charge cavalry'--Poke your pike
into the guts of the horse, and draw it out from under
their tail.

" After that, in the evening, he saw the man who was in
command again form his men around him, and he seemed to
be reading a general order for the night.  After it got
night, one of them came up to him and said, 'Now,
Old Waterloo, you must come and join us,' and he threw
down a pike which he told him to take.  He said, 'No;
it is such a d----d ugly one, I'll have nothing to do
with it.' Another came, and witness asked what bounty
he gave, saying 50 pounds was little enough for an old
Waterloo man.  Because he would not join them he was
taken into custody by them, and was guarded by three
men with pikes at his door.  (Great works!) All this
was on Saturday.  His tent was the second inside the
stockade.  His tent and all his property was destroyed
by fire, it all amounted to 200 pounds.  He believed it
was set fire to by the police." (And so it was, old
Waterloo-no-bolter, good-hearted old man as ever lived
in the world.  If you wish call for a copy of this
book; do.)


NOTICE

GREAT WORKS!!

This day, Saturday, November 10th, 1855.  A glorious day for Ballaarat:
Peter Lalor, our late Commander-in-Chief, being elected by unanimous
acclamation, Member of the Legislative Council for this 'El Dorado.'
I spoke at the Camp face to face with James M`Gill.  We shook hands
with mutual respect and friendship.

M`Gill, at my request, looked full in my eyes, and assured me, that the order
old Waterloo speaks of, was to the effect of appointing officers for watch
at the stockade, for 'out-posts' to keep a sharp look-out, for march to
intercept reinforcements; in short, an order for military discipline,
very necessary under the prevailing excitement.  Said order for the night
(Saturday, December 2nd) was drawn up by his command, and written black
on white by Alfred, the brother of George Black.

M`Gill further stated that the supposed 'Declaration of Independence,'
on the model of the American one, is a gratuitous falsehood, which must have
originated from some well-disposed for, or well-affected to, Toorak small-beer.
Hence,

James M`Gill hereby directs me to challenge the production of the document
in question, either the original or copy of it, of course with satisfactory
evidence of its being a genuine article.

I express the hope that H. R. Nicholls, ex-member of the Local Court,
Ballaarat, will take notice of the above.

Let us return to the Eureka stockade.




Chapter LII.



Quadrupedante Putrem Sonitu Quatit Ungula Campum.


The excitement was of Satan.  It was reported, the whole of the Melbourne road
was swarming with fresh reinforcements.  The military would soon attack
the stockade, but Vern would lead the diggers to death or glory.

I went out to get positive information, and I did see some two hundred
red-coats stationed under arms at the foot of Black hill.  The general
impression spread like wild-fire that the diggers would now all be slaughtered.
I returned, and was anxious to communicate with Lalor.  The council room
was guarded by Californian faces, perfect strangers to me.  The 'pass-word'
had been changed, and I was refused admittance.

Old colonial-looking fellows rode to and fro from all parts:  some brought
canisters of gunpowder and bags of shot; others, fire-arms and boxes of caps.
They had been pressing stores.

All at once burst out a clamorous shouting.  Captain Ross was entering
the stockade in triumph with some old fire-arms and a splendid horse.
They had been sticking up some three or four tents, called the Eureka
government camp.  Great Works! that could have been done long before,
without so much fuss about it; and, forsooth, what a benefit to mankind
in general, that Commissioner Amos, ever since, was so frightened as to get
his large eyes involuntary squinting after his mare!!

Sly-grog sellers got also a little profit out of the Eureka Stockade.
A fellow was selling nobblers out of a keg of brandy hanging from his neck.
It required Peter Lalor in person to order this devil-send out of the stockade.

'Press for,' was the order of the hour.  Two men on horseback were crossing
the gully below.  Young Black--the identical one with a red shirt and blue cap,
who took down the names round Lalor's stump, on Bakery-hill on
Thursday morning, and who, to the best of my knowledge never had yet been
within the stockade--came out of the committee-room, and hastened up to me
with the order to pick out some men and press those two horses in.

I gave him a violent look, and made him understand that 'I won't do
the bushranger yet.'  The order was however executed by fresh hands
entirely unknown to me, who rushed towards the horsemen, shouted to both
of them to stop, and with the threat of the revolver compelled them
to ride their horses within the stockade.  I felt disgusted at the violence.

The reign of terror will not strike root among Britons because the
Austrian rule does not thrive under the British flag; and so here is
a crab-hole that brave Lalor alone can properly log up.

I asked in German from Vern the 'pass-word,' and on whispering 'Vinegar-hill'
to the sentinels, I was allowed to get out of the Stockade.

"Nein, sagte ich mirselbst, nein, eine solche eckliche Wirthschaft
habe ich noch nie geseh'n.

"Nom d'un nom! c'est affreux.  Ces malheureuf sont-ils donc possedes?

"Odi profanum vulgus et arceo.

"Por vida deDios! por supuesto jo fuera el Duke de Alba, esos Gavachos,
carajo, yo los pegaria de bueno.

"Che casa del diavolo, per Dio!  Che ti pare! niente meno si spalanca
l'inferno.  Alla larga! Sor Fattorone:  Pronti denari, Fan patti chiari.
Minca coglione!"

Such were more or less the expressions to give vent to my feelings
on my way to the Prince Albert Hotel, Bakery-hill, to meet there a friend
or two, especially my old mate, Adolphus Lessman, Lieutenant of the Rifle-men.




Chapter LIII.



Turbatus Est A Furore Oculus Meus.


The following is the scene, so characteristic of the times, as it was
going on at the Prince Albert:--

"Who's the landlord here?" was the growl from a sulky ruffian,
some five feet high, with the head of a bull-dog, the eyes of a vulture,
sunken in a mass of bones, neglected beard, sun-burnt, grog-worn,
as dirty as a brute,--the known cast, as called here in this colony,
of a 'Vandemonian,' made up of low, vulgar manners and hard talk,
spiked at each word, with their characteristic B, and infamous B again;
whilst a vile oath begins and ends any of their foul conceits.  Their glory
to stand oceans of grog, joined to their benevolence of 'shouting'
for all hands, and their boast of black-eye giving, nose-smashing,
knocking in of teeth, are the three marks of their aristocracy.
Naturally cowards, they have learned the secret that 'Pluck,' does just as well
for their foul jobs.  Grog is pluck, and the more grog they swallow,
the more they count on success.  Hence their frame, however robust by nature,
wears out through hard drink, and goes the way of all flesh, rarely with
grey hairs.  It is dangerous to approach them; they know the dodge
how to pick up a quarrel for the sake of gratifying their appetite
for fighting.  You cannot avoid them in this colony; they are too numerous.
I saw hundreds of these Vandemonians, during my four months in gaol.
Their heart must be of the same stuff as that of vultures, because they are
of the same trade.  In a word, they are the living witnesses among us,
of the terrible saying of Isaiah, 'The heart of man is desperately wicked.'

Through such did Satan plant his standard to rule this southern land,
before Christ could show his Cross; hence, before famous Ballaarat could point
at a barn, and call it a church, on the township, old Satan had three palaces
to boast of, the first of which--a match for any in the world--has made
the landlord as wealthy and proud as a merchant-prince of the City of London.
'Non ex illis Mecoenates,'--that's the secret how this land has produced
so many first-rate bullock-drivers.

The scene at the Prince Albert is now more interesting.




Chapter LIV.



In Vino Veritas.


The Vandemonian was, of course, accompanied by nine more of his pals,
all of them armed to the teeth with revolvers, swords, pikes, and knives.

Carl Wiesenhavern, a man of noble character, and, therefore a man who hates
knavery, and has no fear of a knave, answered with his peculiar
German coolness, "Here I am, what do you want?"

"Nobblers round," was the eager reply.

"If that's what you want," replied Wiesenhavern, "you shall have it
with pleasure."

"We got no money."

"I did not ask for any:  understand me well, though;" pointing at each of them
with the forefinger of his clenched right hand, "you will have a nobbler
a-piece, and no more:  afterwards you will go your way.  Are you satisfied
with my conditions?"

"Yes, yes! we agree to that:  go on you b----."

Wiesenhavern scorned to notice the fellow, and, according to the old custom
of the house, placed two decanters of brandy, together with the tumblers,
on the bar, saying, "Help yourselves, gentlemen."

They fell at once upon the brandy, and their mean rascality was shown
by some seizing the glass and covering it with the full hand to conceal
their greediness.  Nobbler-drinking is an old colonial habit; it gives pluck
to the coward when he is 'up to something;' so happened it with these fellows.

"Well, landlord, your brandy is d---d good--the real sort of stuff,
and no b----y mistake.  You shouted nobblers round for all hands--that's
all right; it's no more than fair and square now for the boys to shout
for you:" and, with a horrible curse, "Fill up the bottles; let's have
another round."

Wiesenhavern kept himself quiet.  One of the ruffians showed his intention
to enter the bar, and play the landlord within.  Wiesenhavern coolly
persuaded him back by the promise he would fetch from his room,
"something rowdy, the right old sort of stuff--Champagne Cognac, 'tres vieux'."
The fellows presumed their 'bouncing' was all the go now, and laughed
and cursed in old colonial style.

Wiesenhavern fetched his pistols, and his partner, Johan Brandt,
a double-barrelled gun.  Now Mr. Brandt is one of those short,
broad-shouldered, sound, dog-headed Germans, with such a determinate look
when his otherwise slow wrath is stirred up, that it is not advisable
to tackle with his fists, and much less with his rifle.  Wiesenhavern,
with that precision of manners, which always gains the point on such occasions,
placed a decanter full of brandy on the bar, and, with cocked pistols
in both hands, said, "Touch it, if you dare; if any one among you got the pluck
to put in his tumbler one drop out of that bottle there, he is a dead man;"
and Mr. Brandt backed him by simply saying:-

"I'll shoot the fellow, like a dog."

What was the result?  Of course the same, whenever you deal with knaves--
and you make them understand what you mean.  They were cowed;
and as by this time, the high words had called in several old customers
of the house who wished well to it, because they knew it deserved it,
so the ruffians had to cut for fear of their own dear lives.

Then it was related with sorrow, that several similar bands were scouring
the gold-fields in all directions and in the name of the committee
of the Eureka stockade, under cover pressing for fire-arms and ammunition,
plundered the most respectable stores of all they could lay their hands upon.

One instance, as reported there and then by parties who had just witnessed
the transaction.

A similar gang, four strong, had entered the store of D. O'Conner,
on the Golden Point, and asked in the name of the committee, powder and shot,
but the vagabonds did not care so much for ammunition for their guns,
as for the stuff for their guts, what tempted them most was fine good
Yorkshire hams, and coffee to wash it down.  In short, they ransacked
the whole store; and each took care of 'something,' the best of course,
and therefore the cash-box, worth some twenty pounds was not forgotten.

The above are facts.  I do not assert that such were the orders
of the committee, got up after four o'clock of same Saturday at the Eureka
stockade.  I had no part or portion in the committee, and know nothing
of it personally.




Chapter LV.



Non Sit Nobis Vanum, Mane Surgere Ante Lucem.


I ran up to the stockade to remonstrate with Peter Lalor, for whom I had
too much respect to think for one moment, that he had any hand, and much less
that he had sanctioned, such suicidal proceedings.

Thanks to the password; I entered within the stockade.  It must have been
not far from midnight.  I found everything comparatively quiet; the majority
were either asleep of warming themselves round the big fire.  I spoke
in German face to face, for the last time, with Thonen.  M`Gill and two-thirds
of the Independent Californian Rangers' Rifle Brigade, in accordance with
the avocation expressed in the title, were out 'starring' to intercept
reinforcements reported on the road from Melbourne.  Nealson and his division
were off for the same purpose.  Was their lot that of Lot's wife?

Sir Charles Hotham must have possessed the rod of Moses to convert the quartz
of Victoria into red coats, as numerous as the locusts that plagued
Pharaoh's land.  The Local Court of Ballaarat should recommend His Excellency
to carry out the 'abolition of shepherding at Sebastopol.'

I asked Thonen to see Lalor.  I was answered that Peter, from sheer exhaustion,
must rest for an hour or two, and was asleep.

Myself not having closed an eye since Thursday, I felt severely the want
of sleep.  Is not sabbath-keeping our day's cant in the English language?
Anyhow it must be admitted, in justice to both silver and gold lace,
that they take it in good earnest:  to keep the sabbath is a holy and wholesome
thing for them.  I do not remember what was my frame of mind at the time
I wished Thonen good night; very probably, "Enough for the day, the morrow
will have its own troubles:" at any rate, Thonen gave word to the 'outposts,'
chiefly Californians to let me pass to my tent:  and having thrown myself
on my stretcher, with every thing quiet round about, I soon fell asleep.

On the afternoon of Sunday, the following notice was posted up:-


V. R.
NOTICE.
No light will be allowed to be kept burning in any
tent within musket-shot of the line of sentries after
8 o'clock p.m.  No discharge of fire-arms in the
neighbourhood of the Camp will be permitted for any
purpose whatever.
The sentries have orders to fire upon any person
offending against these rules.
(By order),
T. BAILEY RICHARDS,
Lieut. 40th Regt., Garrison Adjutant.




Chapter LVI.



Remember This Sabbath Day (December Third), To Keep It Holy.


I awoke.  Sunday morning.  It was full dawn, not daylight.  A discharge
of musketry--then a round from the bugle--the command 'forward'--and another
discharge of musketry was sharply kept on by the red-coats (some 300 strong)
advancing on the gully west of the stockade, for a couple of minutes.

The shots whizzed by my tent.  I jumped out of the stretcher and rushed
to my chimney facing the stockade.  The forces within could not muster
above 150 diggers.

The shepherds' holes inside the lower part of the stockade had been turned
into rifle-pits, and were now occupied by Californians of the
I.C. Rangers' Brigade, some twenty or thirty in all, who had kept watch
at the 'out-posts' during the night.

Ross and his division northward, Thonen and his division southward,
and both in front of the gully, under cover of the slabs, answered
with such a smart fire, that the military who were now fully within range,
did unmistakably appear to me to swerve from their ground:  anyhow the command
"forward" from Sergeant Harris was put a stop to.  Here a lad was really
courageous with his bugle.  He took up boldly his stand to the left
of the gully and in front:  the red-coats 'fell in' in their ranks to the right
of this lad.  The wounded on the ground behind must have numbered a dozen.

Another scene was going on east of the stockade.  Vern floundered across
the stockade eastward, and I lost sight of him.  Curtain whilst making coolly
for the holes, appeared to me to give directions to shoot at Vern;
but a rush was instantly made in the same direction (Vern's) and a whole pack
cut for Warrenheip.

There was, however, a brave American officer, who had the command
of the rifle-pit men; he fought like a tiger; was shot in his thigh
at the very onset, and yet, though hopping all the while, stuck to Captain Ross
like a man.  Should this notice be the means to ascertain his name,
it should be written down in the margin at once.

The dragoons from south, the troopers from north, were trotting in full speed
towards the stockade.

Peter Lalor, was now on the top of the first logged-up hole within
the stockade, and by his decided gestures pointed to the men to retire
among the holes.  He was shot down in his left shoulder at this identical
moment:  it was a chance shot, I recollect it well.

A full discharge of musketry from the military, now mowed down all
who had their heads above the barricades.  Ross was shot in the groin.
Another shot struck Thonen exactly in the mouth, and felled him on the spot.

Those who suffered the most were the score of pikemen, who stood their ground
from the time the whole division had been posted at the top, facing the
Melbourne road from Ballaarat, in double file under the slabs,
to stick the cavalry with their pikes.

The old command, "Charge!" was distinctly heard, and the red-coats rushed
with fixed bayonets to storm the stockade.  A few cuts, kicks and pulling down,
and the job was done too quickly for their wonted ardour, for they actually
thrust their bayonets on the body of the dead and wounded strewed about
on the ground.  A wild "hurrah!" burst out and 'the Southern Cross'
was torn down, I should say, among their laughter, such as if it had been
a prize from a May-pole.

Of the armed diggers, some made off the best way they could, others surrendered
themselves prisoners, and were collected in groups and marched down the gully.
The Indian dragoons, sword in hand, rifle-pistols cocked, took charge
of them all, and brought them in chains to the lock-up.




Chapter LVII.



Dirigat Dominus Reginum Nostram.


The red-coats were now ordered to 'fall in;' their bloody work was over,
and were marched off, dragging with them the 'Southern Cross.'

Their dead, as far as I did see, were four, and a dozen wounded,
including Captain Wise, the identical one, I think whom I speak of in relating
the events of Tuesday evening, November 28.

Dead and wounded had been fetched up in carts, waiting on the road, and all
red-things hastened to Ballaarat.  The following is for the edification of all
the well-affected and well-disposed of the present and future generation:-


V.  R.
NOTICE.
Government Camp,
Ballaarat, Dec. 3rd, 1854.
Her Majesty's forces were this morning fired upon by a
large body of evil-disposed persons of various nations,
who had entrenched themselves in a stockade on the
Eureka, and some officers and men killed.

Several of the rioters have paid the penalty of their
crime, and a large number are in custody.

All well-disposed persons are earnestly requested to
return to their ordinary occupations, and to abstain
from assembling in large groups, and every protection
will be afforded to them by the authorities.
ROBT. REDE,
Resident Commissioner.
God save the Queen.




Chapter LVIII.



Veritatem Dico Non Menitor.


Here begins a foul deed, worthy of devils, and devils they were.
The accursed troopers were now within the stockade.  They dismounted,
and pounced on firebrands from the large fire on the middle of the stockade,
and deliberately set in a blaze all the tents round about.  I did see
with both eyes one of those devils, a tall, thick-shouldered, long-legged,
fast Vandemonian-looking trooper, purposely striking a bundle of matches,
and setting fire at the corner end, north of the very store of Diamond,
where we had kept the council for the defence.  The howling and yelling
was horrible.  The wounded are now burnt to death; those who had laid down
their arms, and taken refuge within the tents, were kicked like brutes,
and made prisoners.

At the burning of the Eureka Hotel, I expressed it to be my opinion that
a characteristic of the British race is to delight in the calamity of a fire.

The troopers, enjoying the fun within the stockade, now spread it without.
The tent next to mine (Quinn's) was soon in a blaze.  I collected in haste
my most important papers, and rushed out to remonstrate against such
a wanton cruelty.  Sub-inspector Carter pointing with his pistol ordered me
to fall in with a batch of prisoners.  There were no two ways:  I obeyed.
In the middle of the gully, I expostulated with Captain Thomas,
he asked me whether I had been made a prisoner within the stockade.
"No, sir," was my answer.  He noticed my frankness, my anxiety and grief.
After a few words more in explanation, he, giving me a gentle stroke
with his sword, told me "If you really are an honest digger, I do not want you,
sir; you may return to your tent."

Mr. Gordon--of the store of Gordon and M`Callum, on the left of the gully,
near the stockade--who had been made prisoner, and was liberated in the same
way, and at the same time as myself, was and is a living witness to the above.

On crossing the gully to return to my tent, an infernal trooper trotting
on the road to Ballaarat, took a deliberate aim at me, and fired
his Minie rifle pistol with such a tolerable precision, that the shot
whizzed and actually struck the brim of my cabbage-tree hat, and blew it
off my head.  Mrs. Davis, who was outside her tent close by,
is a living witness to the above.

At this juncture I was called by name from Doctor Carr, and Father Smyth,
directed me by signs to come and help the wounded within the stockade.




Chapter LIX.



Quis Dabit Capiti Meo, Aquam Et Oculis Meis Fontem
Lacrymarum Et Plorabo Die Ac Nocte!


I hastened, and what a horrible sight!  Old acquaintances crippled with shots,
the gore protruding from the bayonet wounds, their clothes and flesh burning
all the while.  Poor Thonen had his mouth literally choked with bullets;
my neighbour and mate Teddy More, stretched on the ground, both his thighs
shot, asked me for a drop of water.  Peter Lalor, who had been concealed
under a heap of slabs, was in the agony of death, a stream of blood
from under the slabs, heavily forcing its way down hill.

The tears choke my eyes, I cannot write any further.

Americans! your Doctor Kenworthy was not there, as he should have been,
according to Humffray's letter.

Catholics! Father Smyth was performing his sacred duty to the dying, in spite
of the troopers who threatened his life, and forced him at last to desist.

Protestants! spare us in future with your sabbath cant.  Not one of your
ministers was there, helping the digger in the hour of need.

John Bull! you wilfully bend your neck to any burden for palaver and war
to protect you in your universal shop-keeping, and maintain your sacred rights
of property; but human life is to you as it was to Napoleon:  for him,
fodder for the cannon; for you, tools to make money.  A dead man needs
no further care, and human kind breeds fast enough everywhere after all,--
'Cetera quando rursum scribam'.

On my reaching the stockade with a pannikin of water for Teddy, I was amazed
at the apathy showed by the diggers, who now crowded from all directions
round the dead and wounded.  None would stir a finger.

All on a sudden a fresh swarm of troopers cleared the stockade of all moving
things with the mere threat of their pistols.

All the diggers scampered away and entered all available tents, crouching
within the chimneys or under stretchers.  The valorous, who had given
such a proof of their ardour in smothering with stones, bats, and broken
bottles, the 12th Regiment on their orderly way from Melbourne on Tuesday,
November 28, at the same identical spot on the Eureka, now allowed themselves
to be chained by dozens, by a handful of hated traps, who, a few days before,
had been kept at bay on the whole of the diggings, by the mere shouting
of 'Joe!'  A sad reflection, indeed; a very sad reflection.

Myself and a few neighbours now procured some stretchers, and at the direction
of Doctor Carr, converted the London Hotel into an hospital,
and took there the wounded.

Said Doctor Carr despatched me to fetch his box of surgical instruments
from Dr. Glendinning's hospital on Pennyweight-hill, a distance of a full mile.

I hastened to return, with Dr. Glendinning himself, and I did my best
to assist the helpless, and dress their wounds.

IMPORTANT--I must call the attention of my reader to the following fact:--
When I entered the stockade with Dr. Carr's surgical box, Mr. Binney,
an old acquaintance since the times of Canadian Gully, took me warmly
by the hand, and said, "Old fellow, I am glad to see you alive! everybody
thinks (pointing to a dead digger among the heap) that's poor Great Works!"

The state of mind in which I was, gave me no time to take much notice
of the circumstances, and must have answered, "Thank God, I am alive,"
and proceeded to my duty.

The identical Mr. Binney, of the firm of Binney and Gillot, now storekeepers
on the Ballaarat township, is a living witness to the above statement.

Solicitor Lynn told me, 'in propria persona' in the Ballaarat prison,
that he would take care to bring forward evidence of the above,
as he had heard it himself, that such was the case; but I forgot to fee
this Lynn, and so he left me to the chance of being 'lynched.'




Chapter LX.



The Southern Cross, In Digger's Gore Imbrued,
Was Torn Away, And Left The Digger Mourning.


The following Letter, from the able pen of the spirited correspondent
of the 'Geelong Advertiser' who most undoubtedly must be a digger--that is,
one of ourselves, from among ourselves,--is here transcribed as a document
confirming the truths of this book:-


THE EUREKA MASSACRE
[From a Correspondent.]
To the Editor of the 'Geelong Advertiser' and Intelligencer.
Bakery-hill, December 3rd, 1854.

Friday you know all about; I will pass that over, and give you a faint outline
of what passed under my own eyes.  During Saturday, there was a great deal
of gloom among the most orderly, who complained much of the parade of soldiery,
and the same cause excited a great deal of exasperation in the minds
of more enthusiastic persons, who declared that all parties ought to show
themselves, and declare whether they were for or against the diggers.
Then came a notice from the Camp, that all lights were to be extinguished
after eight o'clock, within half-a-mile from the Camp.  At this time
it was reported that there were two thousand organised men at the Eureka
barricade.  I was sitting in my tent, and several neighbours dropped in
to talk over affairs, and we sat down to tea, when a musket was heard
to go off, and the bullet whizzed close by us; I doused the light,
and we crept out on our hands and knees, and looked about.  Between the Camp
and the barricade there was a fire we had not seen before, and occasionally
lights appeared to be hoisted, like signals, which attracted the attention
of a good many, some of whom said that they saw other lights like
return signals.  It grew late.  TO-MORROW, I FEAR ME, WILL PROVE A DAY
OF SORROW, IF THE AFFAIR BE NOT SETTLED BEFORE THEN.  I and R---- lay down
in our clothes, according to our practice for a week past; and worn out
with perpetual alarms, excitement, and fatigue, fell fast asleep.
I didn't wake up till six o'clock on Sunday morning.  The first thing
that I saw was a number of diggers enclosed in a sort of hollow square,
many of them were wounded, the blood dripping from them as they walked;
some were walking lame, pricked on by the bayonets of the soldiers
bringing up the rear.  The soldiers were much excited, and the troopers
madly so, flourishing their swords, and shouting out--"We have waked up Joe!"
and others replied, "And sent Joe to sleep again!" The diggers' Standard
was carried by in triumph to the Camp, waved about in the air,
then pitched from one to another, thrown down and trampled on.
The scene was awful--twos and threes gathered together, and all felt stupefied.
I went with R---- to the barricade, the tents all around were in a blaze;
I was about to go inside, when a cry was raised that the troopers
were coming again.  They did come with carts to take away the bodies,
I counted fifteen dead, one G----, a fine well-educated man, and a great
favourite.  [Here, I think, the Correspondent alluded to me.  My friends,
nick-named me--Carbonari Great works.  ]--I recognised two others,
but the spectacle was so ghastly that I feel a loathing at the remembrance.
They all lay in a small space with their faces upwards, looking like lead,
several of them were still heaving, and at every rise of their breasts,
the blood spouted out of their wounds, or just bubbled out and trickled away.
One man, a stout-chested fine fellow, apparently about forty years old,
lay with a pike beside him:  e had three contusions in the head,
three strokes across the brow, a bayonet wound in the throat under the ear,
and other wounds in the body--I counted fifteen wounds in that single carcase.
Some were bringing handkerchiefs, others bed furniture, and matting
to cover up the faces of the dead.  O God! sir, it was a sight for
a sabbath morn that, I humbly implore Heaven, may never be seen again.
Poor women crying for absent husbands, and children frightened into quietness.
I, sir, write disinterestedly, and I hope my feelings arose from
a true principle; but when I looked at that scene, my soul revolted
at such means being so cruelly used by a government to sustain the law.
A little terrier sat on the, breast of the man I spoke of, and kept up
a continuous howl:  it was removed, but always returned to the same spot;
and when his master's body was huddled, with the other corpses, into the cart,
the little dog jumped in after him, and lying again on his dead master's
breast, began howling again.----was dead there also, and----, who escaped,
had said, that when he offered his sword, he was shot in the side
by a trooper, as he was lying on the ground wounded.  He expired
almost immediately.  Another was lying dead just inside the barricade,
where he seemed to have crawled.  Some of the bodies might have been removed--
I counted fifteen.  A poor woman and her children were standing outside a tent;
she said that the troopers had surrounded the tent and pierced it
with their swords.  She, her husband, and children, were ordered out
by the troopers, and were inspected in their night-clothes outside,
whilst the troopers searched the tent.  Mr. Haslam was roused from sleep
by a volley of bullets fired through his tent; he rushed out, and was shot down
by a trooper, and handcuffed.  He lay there for two hours bleeding
from a wound in his breast, until his friends sent for a black-smith,
who forced off the handcuffs with a hammer and cold chisel.  When I last heard
of Mr. Haslam, a surgeon was attending him, and probing for the ball.
R----, from Canada, [Captain Ross, of Toronto, once my mate] escaped
the carnage; but is dead since, from the wounds.  R---- has effected
his escape.  [ Johnny Robertson, who had a striking resemblance to me,
not so much in size as in complexion and colour of the beard especially:
Poor Johnny was shot down dead on the stockade; and was the identical body
which Mr. Binney mistook for me.  Hence the belief by many, that I was dead.]
V---- is reported to be amongst the wounded [Oh! no his legs were too long
even for a Minie rifle ].  One man was seen yesterday trailing along the road:
he said he could not last much longer, and that his brother was shot
along-side of him.  All whom I spoke to were of one opinion, that it was
a cowardly massacre.  There were only about one hundred and seventy diggers,
and they were opposed to nearly six hundred military.  I hope all is over;
but I fear not:  or amongst many, the feeling is not of intimidation,
but a cry for vengeance, and an opportunity to meet the soldiers
with equal numbers.  There is an awful list of casualties yet to come in;
and when uncertainty is made certain, and relatives and friends know the worst,
there will be gaps that cannot be filled up.  I have little knowledge
of the gold-fields; but I fear that the massacre at Eureka is only a skirmish.
I bid farewell to the gold-fields, and if what I have seen is a specimen
of the government of Victoria, the sooner I am out of it the better for myself
and family.  Sir, I am horrified at what I witnessed, and I did not see
the worst of it.  I could not breathe the blood-tainted air of the diggings,
and I have left them for ever.

You may rely upon this simple statement, and submit it if you approve of it,
to your readers.

I am, Sir.




Chapter LXI.



Ab Initio Usque Ad Finem Horribile Dictu.

-----

Avanit Il Tuo Cospetto, Dio Potente! Grida Vendetta Il Sangue Innocente.


I.  Document.

As I want to be believed, so I transcribed the following document
from 'The Argus' of Friday, December 15th, 1854.--Gordon Evans,
one of H.M. Captains in the Eureka massacre, now acts in the capacity
of magistrate!--

DEPOSITION OF HENRY POWELL.

The deceased deposed to the following effect:--My name
is Henry Powell, I am a digger residing at Creswick-creek.
I left Creswick-creek about noon on Saturday, December 2nd.
I said to my mates, 'You'll get the slabs ready.  I will
just go over to see Cox and his family at Ballaarat.'
I arrived at Ballaarat about half-past four, or thereabouts.
I saw armed men walking about in parties of twenty or
thirty; went to Cox's tent; put on another pair of
trousers, and walked down the diggings.  Looked in the
ring (the stockade).  After that, went home, went to bed
in the tent at the back of Cox's tent, about half-past
nine.  On Sunday morning about four or half-past,
was awoke by the noise of firing.  Got up soon after,
and walked about twenty yards, when some trooper rode
up to me.  The foremost one was a young man whom I knew
as the Clerk of the Peace.  He was of a light, fair
complexion, with reddish hair.  He told me to "stand in
the Queen's name!  You are my prisoner." I said "Very good,
Sir."  Up came more troopers.  I cannot say how many.
Believe about twenty or thirty.  I said, "Very well,
gentlemen (!) don't be in a hurry, there are plenty of
you," and then the young man struck me on the head with
a crooked knife, about three feet and a half long,
in a sheath.  I fell to the ground.  They then fired
at me, and rode over me several times.  I never had
any hand in the disturbance.  There, that's all.

Ballaarat, Dec. 11, 1854.

-----

FIRST CASE of an inquest which has taken place since
the massacre of the memorable 3rd.  The evidence as to
the murder of Powell (writes 'The Argus' express
correspondent) is but a specimen of the recitals heard
on every hand of the reckless brutality of the troopers
that morning.

VERDICT OF THE JURY.

The death of deceased, Henry Powell, gold-digger, was
caused by sabre cuts and gun shot wounds, wilfully
and feloniously, and of their malice aforethought
inflicted and fired by ARTHUR PURCELL AKEHURST, Clerk
of the Peace, Ballaarat bench, and other persons unknown.

The jury return a verdict of Wilful Murder against
A. P. Akehurst and other persons unknown.

The jury express their condemnation of the conduct of
Captain Evans, in not swearing deceased at the time
of taking his statement after having been cautioned
by Dr. Wills of his immediate danger.  The jury
view with extreme horror the brutal conduct of the
mounted police in firing at and cutting down unarmed
and innocent persons of both sexes, at a distance from
the scene of disturbance, on December 3rd, 1854.

WILLIAMS, Coroner.

-----

Mind, good reader, the above is a legal document.

After my trial, on my way to Ballaarat, I met in Geelong the identical
Akehurst, cracking some nuts with (I mean, speaking to) some young ladies.

I DESPAIR OF THIS COLONY.

May it please HER MAJESTY to cause inquiry to be made into the character
of such that have branded the miners of Ballaarat as disloyal to their QUEEN.




Chapter LXII.



Tempora Nostra.


The following documents are put in here as evidence of 'our times.'


II.  Document.

BALLAARAT.
THE STATEMENT OF FRANK ARTHUR HASLEHAM.
(Now lying wounded at Ballaarat.)

"Whereas I, Frank Arthur Hasleham, a native of the good town of Bedford,
and son of a military officer, to wit, William Gale Hasleham, who bore
His Majesty's commission in the 48th Foot at Talavera, and afterwards
retired from the 6th veteran battallion:

"Whereas I, the aforesaid, having, in my capacity of newspaper correspondent
at Ballaarat, shown, on all proper occasions in general, so especially
during the late insurrectionary movement here, a strong instinctive leaning
to the side of law, authority, and loyalty, was, on the morning of the
3rd instant, fired at and wounded at a time when the affray was over,
and the forces with their prisoners were on the point of returning to the camp,
and in a place whence the scene of action was invisible, and when
no other bloodshed had taken place;

"On these considerations I desire to make on oath the following statements
of facts as they occurred, and as witnessed by others:-

"Shortly after daybreak in the morning mentioned, my three mates and myself
were aroused from sleep by the fire of musketry, a great proportion
of the balls whistling over our tents.  The tent is pitched on a rising ground
about 500 yards south of the stockade; the tent and stockade, each situated
on an eminence, are separated by a large gully running east and west,
and comprising in its breadth nearly the whole of the distance above specified.
Considerably alarmed at the continuance of the firing, we at last got up
and went outside, thinking to find a place of shelter of comparative security.
After I had gone outside the firing gradually fell off, the stockade
was unoccupied, the insurgents' flag was struck, and whatever fighting
was then going on was confined to the further slope of the hill on which
the stockade was situated.  As some desultory firing was still going on,
I advanced about fifty yards down the gully, in order to insure safety
by getting upon lower ground; by this time, with the exception of
an occasional cheer from the military or police, everything was perfectly
quiet, and from where I stood neither soldier nor trooper was to be seen.
A few minutes after a small detachment of mounted police made its appearance
on the hill, and drew up in a line on the either side of the stockade,
the officer in command appeared to be haranguing them.  I was standing
about three hundred yards from them, several other people being near at hand.
I saw three troopers leave the ranks and advance towards me; when one of them
who rode considerably ahead of the other two arrived within hailing distance,
he hailed me as a friend.  Having no reason to think otherwise of him,
I walked forward to meet him.  After he had lured me within safe distance,
namely about four paces, he levelled his holster pistol at my breast
and shot me.  Previous to this, and while advancing towards each other,
he asked me if I wished to join his force; I told him I was unarmed,
and in a weak state of health, which must have been plain to him at the time,
but added that I hoped this madness on the part of the diggers would soon
be over; upon that he fired."

-----

The trooper be d----d; but I congratulate poor Frank, of the good town
of Bedford, for 'this madness on the part of the diggers' procuring him 400
pounds sterling from Toorak; so that he can afford to spare me the trouble
of encroaching any further into his 'statement.'  Great works!


III.  Document more important, by far.

On the 28th November, when some military and ammunition came on the ground,
the detachment was set on at Eureka, near the site of the stockade,
and in the hubbub consequent the troops were somewhat at fault,
and the officer in command called at the London Hotel to inquire the way
to the Camp.  The owner of the hotel, Mr. Hassall, on being asked,
came out of his establishment to point out the way to the officer in command
of the detachment, while so doing he received a ball in his leg, and was
for a while laid up by the wound.  After a long time of suffering,
and a great loss of money directly and indirectly, he applied
for compensation--with what success may be seen from the following letter
just come to hand:-

-----

Colonial Secretary's Office,
Melbourne, 26th October, 1855.

Gentlemen.--The memorial of the miners on behalf of Mr. B. S. Hassall,
wounded during the disturbances at Ballaarat, having been by the governor's
directions referred to the board appointed to investigate such claims,
the board reported, that from the evidence, it appears impossible Mr. Hassall
could have received his wound from the military, and that they could not see
anything to justify their recommending any compensation for him.
His Excellency cannot therefore entertain the petition as he has not power
to award compensation except on the recommendation of the board.

I have the honour to be, gentlemen,
Your most obedient servant,
J.  MOORE, A.C.S.
(To) SAMUEL IRWIN, and
A. C. BRUNNING, Esqrs.


-----

'Great works' this time at Toorak, eh! oh! dear.

So far so good, for the present; because spy 'Goodenough' wants me
in the next chapter.




Chapter LXIII.



Et Scias Quia Nihil Impium Fecerim.


It was now between eight and nine o'clock.  A patrol of troopers and traps
stopped before the London Hotel.

Spy Goodenough, entered panting, a cocked pistol in his hand, looking as wild
as a raven.  He instantly pounced on me as his prey, and poking the pistol
at my face, said in his rage, "I want you."

"What for?"

"None of your d----d nonsense, or I shoot you down like a rat."

"My good fellow don't you see?  I am assisting Dr. Carr to dress the wounds
of my friends!"--I was actually helping to bandage the thigh of an American
digger, whose name, if I recollected it, I should now write down with pleasure,
because he was a brave fellow.  He had on his body at least half-a-dozen shots,
all in front, an evident proof, he had stood his ground like a man.

Spy Goodenough would not listen to me.  Dr. Carr. spoke not a word
in my behalf, though I naturally enough had appealed to him, who knew me
these two years, to do so.  This circumstance, and his being the very first
to enter the stockade, after the military job was over, though he had
never before been on the Eureka during the agitation, his appointment
to attend the wounded diggers that were brought up to the Camp, and especially
his absence at my trial, were and are still a mystery to me.

I was instantly dragged out, and hobbled to a dozen more of prisoners outside,
and we were marched to the Camp.  The main road was clear, and the diggers
crawled among the holes at the simple bidding of any of the troopers
who rode at our side.




Chapter LXIV.



Sic Sinuerunt Fata.


On reaching the Camp, I recognized there the identical American Kenworthy.
I gave him a fearful look.  I suspected my doom to be sealed.

The soldiers were drinking 'ad libitum' from a pannikin which they dipped
into a pail-bucket full of brandy.  I shall not prostitute my hand,
and write down the vile exultations of a mob of drunkards.  It was of the
ordinary colonial sort, whenever in a fight the 'ring' is over.

Inspector Foster, commanded us to strip to the bare shirt.  They did not
know how to spell my name.  I pulled out a little bag containing some
Eureka gold-dust, and my licence; Mr. Foster took care of my bag, and just
as my name was copied from my licence; a fresh batch of prisoners
had arrived, and Mr. Foster was called outside the room where I was
stripping.  Now, some accursed trooper pretended to recognize me as one
of the 'spouts' at the monster meeting.  I wanted to keep my waistcoat
on account of some money, and papers I had in the breast pocket;
my clothes were literally torn into rags.  I attempted to remonstrate,
but I was kicked for my pains, knocked down in the bargain, and thrown
naked and senseless into the lock-up.

The prison was crammed to suffocation.  We had not space enough to lie
down, and so it was taken in turns to stand or lie down.  Some kind friend
sent me some clothes, and my good angel had directed him to bury
my hand-writings he had found in my tent, under a tent in Gravel-pits.

Fleas, lice, horse-stealers, and low thieves soon introduced themselves
to my notice.  This vermin, and the heat of the season, and the stench
of the place, and the horror at my situation, had rendered life
intolerable to me.  Towards midnight of that Sunday I was delirious.
Our growls and howling reached Commissioner Rede, and about two o'clock
in the morning the doors were opened, and all the prisoners from
the Eureka stockade, were removed between two files of soldiers
to the Camp store-house a spacious room, well ventilated and clean.
Commissioner Rede came in person to visit us.  Far from any air of
exultation, he appeared to me to feel for our situation.  As he passed
before me, I addressed him in French, to call his attention to my misery.
He answered very kindly, and concluded thus:-

"'Je ne manquerai pas de parler au Docteur Carr, et si ce que vous venez
de me dire e trouve vrai, je veux bien m'interesser pour vous.'

"'Vous etez bien bon, Monsieur le Commissionaire, repondis-je.'

"'Il faut donc que j'aie eu des ennemis bien cruels au Camp! Avaient-ils
soif de mon sang, ou etaient-ils de mercenaires?  Voila bien un secret,
et je donnerai de coeur ma vie pour le percer.  Dieu leur pardonne, moi,
je le voudrais bien! mais je ne saurai les pardonner jamais.'"




Chapter LXV.



Ecce Homo.


On Monday morning, the fresh air had restored me a little strength.
We had an important arrival among us.  It was the Editor of 'The Times'
newspaper, arrested for sedition.  All silver and gold lace, blue and red
coats in the Camp rushed in to gaze on this wild elephant, whose trunk
it was supposed, had stirred up the hell on Ballaarat.

Henry Seekamp is a short, thick, rare sort of man, of quick and precise
movements, sardonic countenance; and one look from his sharp round set
of eyes, tells you at once that you must not trifle with him.  Of a temper
that must have cost him some pains to keep under control, he hates humbug
and all sort of yabber-yabber.  His round head of tolerable size,
is of German mould, for the earnestness of his forehead is corrected
by the fullness of his cheeks, and a set of moustachios is the padlock
of his mouth, whose key is kept safe in his head, and his heart is the
turn-key.  When his breast is full, and he must make it clean, its gall
will burn wherever it falls, and set the place a blazing.  To keep friends
with such a cast of mind, whose motto is Nelson's, you must do your duty;
never mind if you sink a shicer, bottom your shaft any how.  You are
his enemy if you are or play the flunky; he will call you a 'thing,'
and has a decided contempt for 'incapables.' Hence, his energy was never
abated, though the whole legion of Victorian red-tape wanted to dry
his inkstand, and smother his lamp in gaol.  That there are too many fools
at large, he knows, because he has travelled half the world, what he can
not put up with, is their royal cant, religious bosh, Toorak small-beer,
and first and foremost, their money-grubbing expertness.  Hence, now
and then, his ink turns sour, and thereby its vitriol burns stronger.
'The Times', of which he is the founder, is the Overseer of Ballaarat,
and the 'Dolce far niente' will not prosper.

Our literary prisoner was literally insulted, and could not look with
enough contempt on all those accursed asses braying (at him)
'The Times!'  'The Times!'

I felt for him very much, and joined conversation with him in French.
I state it as a matter of fact, that there and then I had the presentiment
that all the spies pointed me out there, and only there and then as his
accomplice.  Towards ten o'clock we were ordered to fall in, in four rows.
Now the Camp officials and their myrmidons were in their glory.
They came to number their prey, and mark out a score of heads to make
an 'example' of, for the better conduct of future generations.
Unfortunately for my red hair, fizzing red beard, and fizzing red
moustachios, my name was taken down after the armed ruffian and the
anonymous scribbler, and followed by that of the nigger-rebel.

It was odious to see honourable, honest, hard-working men made the gazing
stock of a parcel of pampered perverted fools, for the fun of `a change'
to gratify their contempt for the blue-shirt and thick boots who had
dared, mucky and muddy, to come out of their deep wet holes to hamper
these gods of the land in their dog's game of licence-hunting!




Chapter LXVI.



Then the following document was shown for our edification:-


VICTORIA GOVERNMENT GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY.
(Published by Authority.)
MARTIAL LAW
DECLARED IN THE DISTRICT OF BUNINYONG
PROCLAMATION
By his Excellency Sir Charles Hotham, Knight-Commander of the Most
Honourable Military Order of the Bath Lieutenant--Governor
of Victoria, &c., &c., &c.

WHEREAS bodies of armed men have arrayed themselves against Her Majesty's
forces and the constituted authorities, and have committed acts of open
rebellion:  and whereas, for the effectual suppression thereof it is
imperatively necessary that Martial Law should be administered and
executed within the limits hereinafter described; now I,
the Lieutenant-Governor of the said Colony with the advice of the
Executive Council thereof, do hereby command and Proclaim that
MARTIAL LAW from and after twelve of the clock at noon on Wednesday,
the sixth day of December instant, shall and may be administered against
every person and persons within the said limits, who shall at any time
after the said hour commit any act of rebellion, any treason, treasonable
or seditious practices, or other outrage or misdemeanor whatsoever within
the following limits, that is to say:  arrowee...Lal Lal...Moorabool...
Ran Rip...Yarrowee aforesaid.  And I do hereby, with the advice
aforesaid, order and authorize all officers commanding Her Majesty's
forces to employ them with the utmost vigour and decision for the
immediate suppression of the said rebellion and offences, and to proceed
against and punish every person and persons acting, aiding, or in any
manner assisting in the said rebellion and offences, according to
Martial Law, as to them shall seem expedient for the punishment of all
such persons:  And I do hereby especially declare and proclaim, that no
sentence of death shall be carried into execution against any such person
without my express consent thereto:  ['Great works!']  And I do hereby
with the advice aforesaid, notify this my Proclamation to all subjects
of Her Majesty in the Colony of Victoria.

Given under my Hand and the Seal of the Colony, at Melbourne, this fourth
day of December, in the year of Our Lord one thousand eight hundred
and fifty-four, and in the eighteenth year of Her Majesty's Reign.

(L.S.) CHARLES HOTHAM,
By His Excellency's Command,
JOHN FOSTER.
God save the Queen!

-----

Great works!




Chapter LXVII.



Ecce Amaritudo Mea Amarissima.


We were frightened by the report that a gang of red-coats were sinking
a large pit in the Camp.

"Are they going to bury us alive without any flogging?  That's not half
so merciful as Haynau's rule in Austria;" was my observation to a mate
prisoner--a shrewd Irishman.

"Where did you read in history that the British Lion was ever merciful
to a fallen foe?" was his sorrowfully earnest reply.

Oh! days and nights of the 3rd, 4th, 5th, and 6th of December, 1854,
your remembrance will not end, no, not even in my grave.

They were happy days in my youth, when I thought with Rousseau, that
the heart of man is from nature good.  It was a sad fatality now that
compelled me to feel the truth from the prophet Isaiah, that the heart
of man is desperately wicked.

I was really thunderstruck at the savage eagerness with which spies and
red-coats sprang out of their ranks to point me out.  Though a British
soldier was not ashamed to swear and confess his cowardice of running away
from before my pike, which I never had on the stockade, where the fellow
never could have seen me; I shall not prostitute my intelligence and
comment on the 'evidence' against me from a gang of bloodthirsty mercenary
spies.  The printer will copy my trial from the public newspaper,
'The Age'.




Chapter LXVIII.



Condemn The Wicked, And Bring His Way Upon His Head, Oh,
Lord God Of Israel!


The first witness against me was such a rum sort of old colonial bird of
the jackass tribe, and made such a fool of himself for Her Majesty's dear
sake, about the monster meeting, where as it appeared, he had volunteered
as reporter of the Camp; that now God has given him his reward.  He is a
gouty cripple, still on 'Her Majesty's fodder' at the Camp, Ballaarat.

Who will sharpen my quill and poison my inkstand, that I may put to
confusion the horrible brood of red-tape that ruled on Ballaarat at the
time.  To administer justice in the sacred name of Her Most Gracious
Majesty, they squandered the sweat of self-over-working diggers, on a set
of devils, such that they actually competed with one another, in vomiting
like sick dogs!  Their multitude was taken as a test of their veracity,
on the Mosaical ground, that 'out of the mouth of two witnesses shall the
guilty be condemned;' and yet, with the exception of spy Goodenough,
and spy Peters, none other to my knowledge ever did see my face before.

I assert and declare as an honest man and a Christian, that my eyes never
did see the witnesses against me, before I was under arrest at the Camp.
My soul was drowned in an ocean of bitterness when of that brood of Satan,
one did swear he had run from before my pike; another had fired at me,
but his pistol 'snapped;' a third made me prisoner within the stockade;
a fourth took me up chained to other prisoners who had surrendered,
from the stockade to the Camp.

Such, then, is the perversity of the human heart!  In vain did I point out
to the sitting magistrate the absurdness of their evidence, and the fact
that Sub-inspector Carter and Dr. Carr could prove the contradiction.
I was so embittered and broken-hearted at the wickedness of so many
infuriated mercenary rascals, that had made up their mind to sell the
blood of an honest man, in as much as I had repeatedly told each and all
of them, when they came to 'recognize' in our prison, that they must
mistake me for another as I was not within the stockade that Sunday
morning; that I...but it is too humiliating to say any more.

Mr. Sturt, with an odious face, whose plumpness told me at once he was no
friend to fasting, strutted to the magisterial chair, and committeed me
and the nigger-rebel, to whom I was kindly hobbled, to take our trial
for high treason!




Chapter LXIX.



Vox Populi, Vox Dei.


In the course of the day (December 7th), in spite of all the bayonets and
blunderbusses, the report reached us that the Melbourne people had had
a Monster Meeting of their own, equal to ours of November 29th, and that
Mr. Foster, the 'Jesuit,' had been dismissed from office.

The tragical act on Ballaarat was over; the scenery changed; and the
comedy now proceeded to end in the farce of the State Trials in Melbourne.

Between Wednesday and Thursday, all the 160 prisoners were liberated,
with the necessary exception of thirteen, reserved to confirm the title
of this book.

I do not wish to omit one significant circumstance.  On Tuesday night,
December 5th, I was hobbled for the night to young Fergusson, an American,
and shared with him his blankets.  I felt very much for this young man,
for he suffered from consumption; and as I do respect him, so I shall not
disclose our private conversation.  This, however, is to the purpose.
He was among us, and with us at four o'clock on Saturday, at one and the
same time when spy Peters was within the stockade.

No spy, no trap, no trooper appeared against young Fergusson.  Doctor
Kenworthy, his countryman, had the management of getting him off.  I was
glad at his obtaining his liberty, because he was a brave, kind-hearted,
republican-minded young American, and I intend to keep his blue blankets
he left to me in prison for my comfort, in his remembrance.




Chapter LXX.



Audi Alteram Partem.
'Fair Play'.


As I wish to be believed, so I transcribe the following from 'The Argus',
Friday, December 15, 1854;

MAINTENANCE OF LAW AND ORDER.

The Lieutenant-Governor received a deputation from, with an address signed
by, five hundred bankers, merchants, and other classes resident in
Melbourne, placing themselves, their services, and their influence
unreservedly at His Excellency's disposal, for the maintenance or order
and upholding of the paramount authority of existing (!) law.

His Excellency listened with marked attention to the address, to which he
gave the following answer:--

"Gentlemen...

"...It is necessary to look its (the Colony's) difficulty full in the face.

"Here we have persons from all parts of the globe,--men who come to look
for gold and gold alone; men of adventurous spirit, of resolution, and of
firm purpose to carry out the principles which actuate them.  If gold
fails, or the season is unfavourable, we must expect such outbreaks and
such dangers as have given rise to the most loyal and valuable address
which you present to me.  ['Pardon, Monsiegneur, apres lecture des versets
28, 29, du chap. I., et versets 17, 18, 19, du chap. III., de la Genese,
favorisez s'il vous plait l'exploitation de l'activite de tous ces
gaillards la, par la Charrue:  l n'y a pas mal de terres ici, et bien
pour tout le monde.  Audaces fortuna juvat.']

"I desire to govern by the people, and through the people: and by the
people I mean through the intelligence of the people.  ['Elle est fameuse,
Monseigneur l'intelligence de ceux, qui vous ont conseille l'affaire de
Ballaarat! surtout in farce odieuse de haute-trahison!']

"In Ballaarat it was not a particular law, against which objection was
raised, nor was there a particular complaint made.  ['Oh, pardon,
Monseigneur:  ou l'on vous a toujours mal informe; ou l'on vous a souvent
cache la verite:  alheureusement, cela n'a pas beaucoup change meme
aujourd'hui'.'  Vide 'The Times', Ballaarat, Saturday, September 29, 1855,
and Saturday, November 10th--Local Court.]

"...It was not exactly the licence fee, that caused the outbreak, though
that was made the 'nom de guerre,' the 'cheval de bataille,' this was not
the real cause.  I consider that the masses were urged on by designing men
who had ulterior views, and who hoped to profit by anarchy and confusion.
['Comment se fait il Monseigneur que vous mettez le prix de 500 pounds
sur la tete du chef de ces blagueurs du Star Hotel, a Ballaarat; et puis
vous lassiez courir le malin a son aise!  Avez-vous, oui ou non,
Monseigneur, accorde votre pardon a M`Gill? et les autres Americains
donc?']

"Then we have active, designing, intriguing foreigners, who also desire
to bring about disorder and confusion." ['Cependant, moi, bon garcon apres
tout, et d'une ancienne famille Romaine, j'ai ete VOLE sous arret au
Camp de Ballaarat par VOS gens et avec impunite, Monseigneur.  Vous me
faites l'honneur d'avouer par votre lettre la chose, mais vous n'avez
point fait de restitution.  Ce n'est pas comme cela que j'entends le vieux
mot Anglais, Fair-play.']"

Hence, I had better address myself to the five hundred gentlemen, who
belong to the brave Melbourne people after all.

Gentlemen,

Five hundred copies of this work, which costs me an immense labour,
for the sake of the cause of truth, will be left with

MESSRS.  MUIR, BROTHERS AND CO.,
Merchants, Flinders-lane, Melbourne--

of the same firm much respected on Ballaarat, to whom I am personally
known long ago, having been their neighbour on the Massacre-hill, Eureka.
Ten shillings is my price for each copy: and, as Messrs. Muir render this
service to me gratuitously, so I hereby authorise them to keep
half-a-crown from each ten shillings, and in the spirit of St. Matthew,
verses 1, 2, 3, 4, chap. vi.,share said halfcrowns in the following
proportion:  one shilling to the Benevolent Asylum; one shilling to the
Melbourne Hospital, and sixpence to the Miners' Hospital, Ballaarat.

I hope thus to understand 'Fair-play' better than Toorak.

I have not yet done with His Excellency's answer.

"The part which the bankers, merchants, tradesmen and others in Melbourne
and in Geelong ['pas a Ballaarat, Monseigneur'], have taken in coming
forward to support me, I shall be careful to represent properly at home,
where perhaps these occurrences may attract more attention than they
deserve.  ['Pour votre bonheur, Monseigneur, Sebastopol leur donne assez
d'occupation pour le moment.']

"I shall declare my opinion that the mass of the community does not
sympathise with these violators of the law."  ['Est-ce donc un reve,
Monseigneur, que votre gouvernment en voulait a ma tete, aussi, bien
qu'a celle de douze autres prisonnier, d'etat, et que le peuple nous
a acquitte glorieusement par'
SEVEN BRITISH JURIES!]

'Mon ardent desir, mon tourment presque, c'est d'avoir vite l'honneur
de parler, encore une fois sur la terre, a SA MAJESTE LA REINE VICTORIA.'

'AINSI-SOIT-IL.'




Chapter LXXI.



The State Prisoners.


I Beg to say at once, that with the exception of Hayes and Manning, of the
remaining ten, seven were perfect strangers to me; three I had simply met
at work on the gold-fields; and I won't say anything further.

Yes, though, MICHAEL TUHEY was the stoutest heart among us, an Irishman
in word and deed, young, healthy, good-hearted chap, that hates all the
ways of John Bull, he had been misled by honest George Black countenancing
the two demagogues at Creswick-creek, and had hastened with his
double-barrelled guns to Ballaarat, and stood his ground like an Irishman,
against the red-coats.  He never was sorry for it.  His brother paid some
forty pounds to a certain solicitor for his defence, but when Mic was
tried for his neck, the Hog was not there.  GOD SAVE THE PEOPLE!

THOMAS DIGNAM, a serious-looking, short, tight-built young chap, a native
of Sydney, who hated all sort of rogues, because he was honest in heart.
He brunted courageously the mob fury on Tuesday evening, November 28th,
on the Eureka, and actually saved at the risk of his own life, the life
of a soldier of the 12th regiment on its way to Ballaarat; he took up
arms in the cause of the diggers in Thursday's licence-hunt, was
subsequently under drill at the stockade; fought like a tiger on Sunday
morning; repented not of having put on stretchers a couple of red-coats;
was always cheerful, contented and kind-hearted during the four months
in gaol; paid his last farthing out of the honest sweat of his brow,
to Stephens his solicitor for the defence (above thirty pounds) and when
put in the dock to take his trial for high-treason, lo! there was no
charge against him; the prosecution was dropped.  GOD SAVE THE QUEEN!

We are however still in chokey at Ballaarat.  We were put under the
officious care of Sergeant Harris, who condescended to show some affection
for Joseph, to prove that his Christian love could extend even to niggers;
but the red-coat wanted to draw worms from the black rebel.  We were nigh
bursting for laughter, when Joseph during his two days' trial came into
our yard for his meals, and related to us with such eye-twinklings,
widening of nostrils, trumping up the lips, scratching all the while his
black wool so desperately, and the doodle music of his unearthly whistle!
"how old chappyman and a tother smart 'un of spin-all did fix that there
mob of traps; 'specially that godammed hirpocrit of sergeant, I guess."

JOHN JOSEPH, a native of New York, under a dark skin possessed a warm,
good, honest, kind, cheerful heart; a sober, plain-matter-of-fact
contented mind; and that is more than what can be said of some
half-a-dozen grumbling, shirking, snarling, dog-natured state prisoners.

Sergeant Harris took it into his head to humble Hayes--humility is also a
Christian virtue--and so honoured him with the perfumery job of clearing
the tub at the corner, full of urine and solids.  Hayes, for the lark did
it once, but found it against his principles to practise on said tub
again, and thus got into disgrace with our overkind sergeant.

To be serious:  Timothy Hayes, our chairman at the monster meeting,
aristocratically dressed among us, had like the rest his plump body
literally bloated with lice from the lock-up.  Poor Manning was the worst.
Myself, I was plagued with that disgusting vermin, all through those
ignominious four months in gaol.

It were odious to say many, many other things.




Chapter LXXII.



Is There A Mortal Eye That Never Wept?


On Sunday afternoon, we witnessed a solemn scene, which must be recorded
with a tear wherever this book may find a reader.

The sun was far towards the west.  All had felt severely the heat of the
day.  The red-coats themselves, that were of the watch, felt their ardour
flagging.  Of twelve prisoners, some gazed as in 'a fix,' and were
stationary; others, 'acursing,' swept up and down the prison; the rest,
cast down, desponding, doing violence to themselves, to dam their flooded
eyes.  I was among the broken-hearted.

Mrs. Hayes, who in the days of her youth must have made many young Irish
hearts ache 'for something,' had brought now a bundle of clean clothing,
and a stock of provisions, to make her husband's journey to Melbourne as
comfortable as possible.  There she was, holding her baby sucking at her
breast; her eyes full on her husband, which spoke that she passionately
loved him.  Six children, neatly dressed, and the image of their father,
were around.  Timothy Hayes forced himself to appear as cheerful as his
honourable heart and proud mind would allow.  He pressed his little
daughter, who wanted to climb his shoulder; he pronounced his blessing
on the younger of his sons.  The eldest (twelve years old) was kissing
his father's left hand, bathing it all the while with such big tears,
that dropped down so one by one, and so after the other!

Good boy, your sorrows have begun soon enough for your sensible heart!
Strengthen it by time with Christian courage, or else you will smother it
with grief, long before your hair has turned grey!  There are too many
troubles to go through in this world.  Take courage; there is a God,
and therefore learn by heart the Psalm, 'Beatus vir qui timet Dominum.'
My head has still the red hair of my youth, and yet I am a living witness
of many truths in that Psalm; meditate, therefore, especially on the last
verse, ending 'Desiderium peccatorum peribit.'

Had I in younger years cultivated painting, I feel satisfied that I could
produce now such a tableau as to match any of my countryman, Raffaelle;
so much an all-wise Providence has been pleased, perhaps for the trial of
my heart, to endow me with a cast of mind that, on similar occasions as
the solemn one above, whenever my electric fluid is called into action,
it is actually a daguerreotype.



Chapter LXXIII.



Amare Rimembranze.


At four o'clock on Tuesday morning, we were commanded to fall in, dressed
and hobbled as we were.  Captain Thomas, with the tone and voice of a
country parson, read to us his 'Order of the day,' to the effect that we
were now under his charge for our transit to Melbourne; that if any of us
stirred a finger, or moved a lip--especially across the diggings--his
orders were that the transgressor should be shot on the spot.  This
arrangement, so Austrian-like, and therefore unworthy of a British officer,
did not frighten us, and I cried, loud enough, "God save the Queen!"

Inspector Foster sprang up to me with his hopping leg, put on me tighter
darbies, and together with the mulatto-rebel put us in front of the cart,
giving strict orders to shoot us both down if we attempted to turn our
heads.  'Veritatem dico, non mentior'; and so Messrs, Haynau, Jellachich,
and Co., from that morning my hatred for you is on the decline.

They rode us through the main road as fast is it was safe for the
preservation of our necks--the only thing they wanted to preserve
inviolate for head-quarters.

Though it was clear daylight, yet I did see only one digger on the whole
of the main road.

On passing through the Eureka, I got a glance of my snug little tent,
where I had passed so many happy hours, and was sacred to me on a Sunday.
There it lay deserted, uncared for!  My eyes were choked with tears,
and at forty years of age a man does not cry for little.




Chapter LXXIV



Della Vita Lo Spello Dal Mondo Sciolto,
Al Mondo Vivo Perche Non Son Sepolto.


We were soon in Ballan.  Good reader, please enter now within my mind.
The lesson, if read, learned, and inwardly digested, will be of good use
for the future.  The troubles of this colony have begun.

It is eight o'clock of a fine morning; the spring season is in its full:
the sun in his splendour is all there on the blue sky.  Nature all around
is life.  The landscape is superb.  It reminded me 'della Bella Cara
Itallia'.  The bush around was crammed with parrots, crows, and other
chattering birds of the south.  They were not prevented from singing
praises each in its own language to the Creator, and all was joy and
happiness with them.  Unfortunately those lands lay uncultivated by the
hand of man; but were not left idle by nature.  Lively, pretty little
flowers of the finest blue, teemed here, there, and everywhere, through
the splendid grass, wafed to and fro by a gentle wind.

Look now at the foot of the picture.

There were thirteen of us all healthy, honest, able-bodied men, chained
together on three carts.  A dozen of dragoons, strong, sound-looking men,
were riding on horseback as sharp-shooters, in all directions, before our
carts in the bush.  Their horses were really splendid animals.  A score
of troopers of the accursed stamp we had then on Ballaarat, sword
unsheathed, carbines cocked, kept so close to our carts that one of these
Vandemonians was half jammed on riding by a large gum-tree; was thrown
from his horse, and disabled, but not killed.  We are at last in Ballan,
for change of horses.  Captain Thomas and a stout healthy-looking man,
with a pair of the finest black whiskers I ever saw, in the garb of a
digger, who gave such orders to the coachman, as were always attended to,
with the usual colonial oaths as a matter of course, were regaling
themselves with bottled porter on a stump of a tree outside the
public-house.  The dragoons and troopers had biscuit, cheese, and ale
served to them, though paid for by themselves, before our teeth.

There was no breakfast for the poor state prisoners, in chains, and lying
on the bare ground.  They had some trouble before they could obtain from
the red-coats watching over them, and blowing heaps of smoke from stump
pipes, a drop of cold water--I mean actually a drop of cold water.

Good reader, you know WHOM I did bless, whom I did curse.




Chapter LXXV.



Petite, Sed Non Accipietis, Quia Petistis.


The following document, which does honour and justice to its writer,
J. Basson Humffray, to 4500 of our fellow-miners of Ballaarat, who signed
it, to the state prisoners themselves, is now here transcribed as
necessary to the purpose of this book.


THE BALLAARAT DELEGATES, AND THEIR INTERVIEW WITH
HIS EXCELLENCY SIR CHARLES HOTHAM, K.C.B., &c

The public has already seen the written reply of His
Excellency to the petition from Ballaarat, signed by
nearly 4500 of the inhabitants of that important, but
'officially' ridden place.

We deem it our duty to the public, and especially to
those whose delegates we are, to state the main reasons
urged by us for a general amnesty, and to make some general
remarks thereon, and also upon the reply.  We have delayed
doing this, as we expected to have returned immediately
to Ballaarat, and we did not wish to forestall our intended
statement at a public meeting, which would have been held
on our return; but as circumstances interfere with this
arrangement, we now give our report.

We were very kindly and respectfully received by His
Excellency.

We thought it right to state that we repudiated physical
force as a means of obtaining constitutional redress,
believing that the British constitution had sufficient
natural elasticity to adapt itself to the wants of the
age, and would yield under proper pressure.  But the
arming of the diggers of Ballaarat, however reprehensible
it might have been in itself, claims to be judged on
special grounds, inasmuch as they had special provocation.
The diggers of Ballaarat were attacked by a military
body under the command of civil (!) officers, for the
production of licence-papers, and, if they refused to
be arrested, deliberately shot at.  The diggers did not
take up arms, properly speaking, against the government,
but to defend themselves against the bayonets, bullets,
and swords of the insolent officials in their unconstitutional
attack, who were a class that would disgrace any government,
by their mal-administration of the law.

The diggers did not take up arms against British rule,
but against the mis-rule of those who were paid to administer
the law properly; and however foolish their conduct might
be, it was an ungenerous libel on the part of one of the
military officers to designate outraged British subjects
as 'foreign anarchists and armed ruffians.'

The diggers were goaded on to take the stand they did
by the 'digger-hunt,' of the 30th November, which, we
are sustained in saying, was a base piece of gold and
silver lace revenge.  Facts will no doubt appear by-and-bye,
elucidating and confirming this statement.

We reminded His Excellency of the fact, that the public
had asked for or sanctioned a general amnesty; and although
we were prepared to admit that it was unbecoming the
dignity of any government to give way to what was termed
'popular clamour,' yet, in this case, the good and the
wise amongst all classes, forming a very large proportion
of the inhabitants, had asked for it, and we thought the
general wish should not be lightly treated.  His Excellency
observed, "Certainly not." We argued that an amnesty would
restore general confidence, and secure support to the
government in any emergency; and, even supposing there
was any one in the movement who sought to overturn the
government, instead of overturning corruption, and establishing
a better system of administration, a general amnesty would
silence such, as the great majority of the diggers were
content to live under British law, if properly administered;
and every one knows there has been much to condemn in
the administration of the laws, on the Ballaarat gold-fields
especially; and we endeavoured to impress upon the mind
of the Lieutenant-Governor, that it was equally true
that the majority of those who were proud of being British
subjects, were growing tired of waiting for simple justice.
And if the executive wish to secure their confidence
and support, they must give better evidence of their
good intentions of making better laws, or laws better
suited to the wants of the people, and securing 'equal
justice to all.'  Their recent conduct has created disaffection
amongst the ranks of the best disposed; in fact, those
who disapproved of the resort to arms on the part of
the diggers, condemn in the most unqualified manner the
conduct of the Ballaarat officials in collecting a tax
(obnoxious at the best) at the bayonet's point, and of
the late Colonial Secretary, who could unblushingly write
to Commissioner Rede (who superintended the digger-hunt
on the 30th November, and, no doubt, counselled the Sunday
morning's butchery), thanking him for his conduct on those
occasions! And that if His Excellency would allow us to
strip the matter of its official colouring, he would see
things in a very different light than they had been officially
represented.

That an amnesty would not only secure the confidence of
the people in the Governor, but it would show the confidence
of the Governor in the people--it would be looked upon as
a proof of the strength and vigour of the British constitution,
instead of weakness in those that administer the laws under
its guidance.

That His Excellency could well afford to be generous.

That, in asking for an amnesty, we were aware it was asking
for much, and what a statesman should not do without due
deliberation.  But at the same time, we submitted we did
not ask anything inconsistent with the true interests of
the colony, or derogatory to the dignity and honour of
the throne itself.

That a general amnesty to the state prisoners would tend
much to consolidate the power of the British government
in this colony, and show that the representative of Majesty
here can afford to be just--to be generous; with the full
confidence that such an act would meet with the full
concurrence of the Queen of England, and the approbation
of the whole British empire.  That in this he would act
wiser far in listening to the voice of the people than
to the short-sighted counsel of the law-advisers of the
Crown.  Humanity has higher claims than the mere demands
and formalities of human law.

We forbear saying all that might be said as to the spies
being sent from the Camp to enrol themselves amongst the
insurgents, and who, report says, urged them to attack
the Camp, which was repudiated by the diggers--they
saying they would act upon the defensive.

That we believed the enforcement of the law in this case
would have the most pernicious effect, not only upon the
commerce of the colony, but would retard, if not prevent,
the accomplishment of those schemes of reform that His
Excellency had promised.

That if he valued the good opinions of the people--the
peace and prosperity of the colony, he would be giving
the best evidence of it by granting the amnesty we prayed
for; but that, if His Excellency punished these men, it
would be calling into existence an agitation which would,
we feared, end in civil commotion, if not in the disseverance
of the colony from the mother country.

That we thought there were reasons sufficiently important
to justify an amnesty, on the grounds of state policy alone.

But even supposing there were no legitimate grounds for
an amnesty, and that the government have been right in
all that they have done--which would be saying what facts
do not warrant--surely the slaughter of some fifty people
is blood enough to expiate far greater crimes than the
diggers of Ballaarat have been guilty of, without seeking
the lives of thirteen more victims.  The government would
act wisely in not pursuing so suicidal a course.

His Excellency states, in his written reply, that the
diggers, notwithstanding his promise of inquiry into all
their grievances, had forestalled all inquiry.

On this head, we would wish to remark, that the fault
lies at the door of the government, in prostituting the
military, by making them tax collectors, and placing them
at the disposal of a few vain officials, who were not
over-stocked with brains, and ignorant of the functions
of constitutional government.  But one fact they seemed
fully sensible of, viz.:  That 'Othello' occupation would
indeed soon 'be gone,' and they were determined to 'crush
the scoundrels' who dared to question the policy, or even
justice, or a government keeping up such an expensive army
of La Trobian idlers as strut about in borrowed plumes
with all the insolence of office; who, in fact, have proved
themselves, with a few honourable exceptions, fit for
little else than bringing the colony into debt; creating
disaffection amongst the people, and stamping indelible
disgrace upon any government that would uphold the system
that tolerates them.  One of these 'retiring' gentlemen
stated on the morning of the famed 'digger-hunt' of the
30th November, in reply to one of the refractory diggers:
"If you do not pay your licences, how are we to be supported
at the Camp?" and further, "There are some disaffected
scoundrels I am determine to arrest!"  To crush! for what?
For daring to refuse to pay taxes except they had a voice
in the expending of them for the public weal; public taxes
are public property.  Some of these 'gentlemanly' officials
made use of language on the occasion alluded to, that not
only gave evidence of considerable malignity, but of a
vulgarity that a gentleman would scorn to use; and we think
it not an unfair inference to draw from the foregoing facts,
that the digger-hunt of the 30th of November, and the cruel
slaughter of the 3rd December, were unmistakable acts of
petty official revenge; and, therefore, instead of the
diggers forestalling the Commission of Inquiry, appointed
by His Excellency, we advisedly say it was Commissioner
Rede and Co. who forestalled the inquiry by endeavouring
to crush the '500 scoundrels' he complained of--a scoundrel
in that gentleman's estimation seems to be one who thinks
that some 12 pounds per head per annum is rather too heavy
a tax for an Englishman to pay, especially if used in
supporting men so unfit for office as he has proved himself
to be.  This gentleman was the arch-rioter of the 30th
November; in this we are confirmed (if confirmation of
well-known facts were needed) by the verdict of acquittal
of the so called 'Ballaarat Rioters,' partially on the
evidence of Mr. Rede himself.

In the latter part of His Excellency's reply, he very
properly lays it down as 'the duty of government to administer
equal justice to all;' which is no doubt the noblest principle
of the English constitution, and we certainly have no fears
for the peace of even colonial society, with all its supposed
discordant elements, so long as that principle is practically
carried out; but we are under well founded apprehension
if the reverse is to be the order of the day.

There is a paragraph in our petition to the effect, that
if 'His Excellency had found sufficient extenuation in
the conduct of American citizens,' we thought there were
equally good grounds for extending similar clemency to
all, irrespective of nationality; and that it was unbecoming
the dignity of any government to make such exceptions;
and if such have been done (and that something tantamount
to it has been done, there is ample proof), it is a violation
of the very principle enunciated by His Excellency in his
report viz., 'That it is the duty of a government to
administer equal justice to all.'  What we contend for is
this:--If it be just to grant an amnesty to a citizen of
one country, 'equal justice' claims an amnesty for all.
We wish it to be distinctly understood by our American
friends, that we do not for a moment find fault with His
Excellency for allowing their countrymen to go free, but
we do complain, in sorrow, that he does not display the
same liberality to others--that he does not wisely and
magnanimously comply with the prayer of our petition by
granting a general amnesty.

But it is stated further in the reply, that 'no exception
had been made in favour of any person against whom a charge
was preferred.'  With all becoming deference to His Excellency,
we think this does not meet the point.  If the gentleman
were innocent, why guarantee him against arrest?  And if
his friends (and we give them credit for good tact) anticipated
the 'preferment of a charge,' it does not create any special
grounds for an amnesty in contradistinction to a general amnesty.

Again, upon whom lies the onus of 'preferring charge?'
500 pounds was offered for Vern, 'DEAD OR ALIVE' and
400 pounds for Lalor and Black; and yet we presume there
was no charge, or charges, 'preferred' against them any
more than the gentleman alluded to.  We yet trust that
the same good feeling that induced His Excellency to give
James M`Gill his liberty will increase sufficiently strong
to unbar the prison-doors, and set the state captives free,
that they may be restored to their homes, their sorrowing
families, and sympathising countrymen.  By such an act,
the Lieutenant-Governor will secure the peace of society,
and the respect and support of the people, and be carrying
out the glorious principle he has proclaimed of 'Equal
Justice to All.'

J. BASSON HUMFFRAY,
C. F. NICHOLLS,
(of Ballaarat.)
Melbourne, 23rd January, 1855.




Chapter LXXVI.



Quid Sum Miser, Nunc Dicturus.


At Bacchus Marsh we were thrown into a dark lockup, by far cleaner than
the lousy one of Ballaarat.  Captain Thomas, who must have acknowledged
that we had behaved as men, sent us a gallon of porter, and plenty of
damper; he had no occasion to shoot down any of us.  I write now this his
kindness with thanks.

At last, after a long, long day, smothered with dust, burning with thirst,
such that the man in the garb of a digger had compassion on us, and
shouted a welcome glass of ale to all of us--we arrived before the
Melbourne gaol at eight o'clock at night.

From the tender mercies of our troopers, we were given up to the gentle
grasp of the turnkeys.  The man in the garb of a digger introduced us to
the governor, giving such a good account of us all, that said governor,
on hearing we had had nothing to eat since mid-day, was moved to let us
have some bread and cheese.

We were commanded to strip to the bare shirt--the usual ignomy to begin a
prison life with--and then we were shown our cell--a board to lie down on,
a blanket--and the heavy door was bolted on us.

Within the darkness of our cell, we now gave vent to our grief, each in
his own way.

Sleep is not a friend to prisoners, and so my mind naturally wandered back
to the old spot on the Eureka.




Chapter LXXVII.



Requiescant In Pace.


Lalor's Report of the Killed and Wounded at the Eureka Massacre, on the
morning of the memorable Third of December, 1854:-


The following lists are as complete as I can make them.  The numbers are
well known, but there is a want of names.  I trust that the friends or
acquaintances of these parties may forward particulars to 'The Times'
office, Ballaarat, to be made available in a more lengthened narrative.


KILLED.

1 JOHN HYNES, County Clare, Ireland.
2 PATRICK GITTINS, Kilkenny, do.
3---- MULLINS, Kilkenny, Limerick, Ireland.
4 SAMUEL GREEN, England.
5 JOHN ROBERTSON, Scotland.
6 EDWARD THONEN (lemonade man), Elbertfeldt, Prussia.
7 JOHN HAFELE, Wurtemberg.
8 JOHN DIAMOND, County Clare, Ireland.
9 THOMAS O'NEIL, Kilkenny, do.
10 GEORGE DONAGHEY, Muff, County Donegal, do.
11 EDWARD QUIN, County Cavan, do.
12 WILLIAM QUINLAN, Goulbourn, N.S.W.
13 and 14 Names unknown.  One was usually known on Eureka as 'Happy Jack.'


WOUNDED AND SINCE DEAD.

1 LIEUTENANT ROSS, Canada.
2 THADDEUS MOORE, County Clare, Ireland.
3 JAMES BROWN, Newry, do.
4 ROBERT JULIEN, Nova Scotia.
5 ----CROWE, unknown.
6 ----FENTON, do.
7 EDWARD M`GLYN, Ireland.
8 No particulars.


WOUNDED AND SINCE RECOVERED.

1 PETER LALOR, Queen's County, Ireland.
2 Name unknown, England.
3 PATRICK HANAFIN, County Kerry, Ireland.
4 MICHAEL HANLY, County Tipperary, do.
5 MICHAL O'NEIL, County Clare, do.
6 THOMAS CALLANAN, do.  do.
7 PATRICK CALLANAN, do.  do.
8 FRANK SYMMONs, England.
9 JAMES WARNER, County Cork, Ireland.
10 LUKE SHEEHAN, County Galway, do.
11 MICHAEL MORRISON, County Galway, do.
12 DENNIS DYNAN, County Clare, do.


(Signed) PETER LALOR,
Commander-in-Chief.


What has become of GEORGE BLACK, was, and is still, a MYSTERY to me.
I lost sight of him since his leaving for Creswick-creek, on
December 1, 1854.




Chapter LXXVIII.



Homo Natus De Muliere, Brevi Vivens Tempore Repletur Multis Miseriis.
Qui Quasi Flos Conterritur Et Egreditur; Postea Velut Umbra Disperditur.


It is not the purpose of this book, to begin a lamentation about my four
long, long months in the gaol.  My health was ruined for ever:  if that be
a consolation to any one; let him enjoy it.  To say more is disgusting to
me and would prove so to any one, whose motto is 'Fair-play.'

A dish of 'hominy' (Indian meal), now and then fattened with grubs,
was my breakfast.

A dish of scalding water, with half a dozen grains of rice, called soup,
a morsel of dry bullock's flesh, now and then high-flavoured, a bit of
bread eternally sour--any how the cause of my suffering so much of
dysentery, and a couple of black murphies were my dinner.

For tea, a similar dish of hominy as in the morning, with the privilege
of having now and then a bushranger or a horse-stealer for my mess-mate,
and often I enjoyed the company of the famous robbers of the Victoria Bank.

But the Sunday!  Oh the Sunday! was the most trying day.  The turnkeys,
of course, must enjoy the benefit of the sabbath cant, let the prisoners
pray or curse in their cells.  I was let out along with the catholics,
to hear mass.  I really felt the want of Christian consolation.  Our
priest was always in a hurry, twice did not come, once said half the mass
without any assistant; never could I hear two words together out of his
short sermon.  Not once ever came to see us prisoners.

After mass, I returned to my cell, and was let out again for half an hour
among all sorts of criminals, some convicted, some waiting their trial,
in the large yard, to eat our dinner, and again shut up in the cell till
the following Monday.




Chapter LXXIX.



'Souvenirs' De Melbourne.


Five things I wish to register:  the first for shame; the second for
encouragement; the third for duty; the fourth for information; the fifth
for record.

1. We were one afternoon taken by surprise by the whole gang of turnkeys,
ordered to strip, and subjected to an ignominious search.  The very
private parts were discovered and touched.  'Veritatem dico, non mentior.'

2. Manning felt very much the want of a chew of tobacco.  He and Tuhey
would make me strike up some favourite piece out of the Italian opera,
and the charm succeeded.  A gentle tap at the door of our cell was the
signal to get from a crack below a stick of tobacco, and then we were all
jolly.  We decreed and proclaimed that even in hell there must be some
good devils.

3. Mr. Wintle, the governor, inclining to the John Bull in corporation,
had preserved even in a Melbourne gaol, crammed as it is at the end of
each month with the worst class of confirmed criminals, his good, kind
heart.  With us state prisoners, without relaxing discipline, he used no
cruelty--spoke always kindly to us--was sorry at our position, and wished
us well.  He had regard for me, on account of my bad health; that I shall
always remember.

4. Some day in January we received a New-Year's Present--that is a copy
of the indictment.  I protest at once against recording it here:  it is
the coarsest fustian ever spun by Toorak Spiders.  I solemnly declare that
to my knowledge the name of Her Most Gracious Majesty was never mentioned
in any way, shape, or form whatever, during the whole of the late
transactions on Ballaarat.  I devoured the whole of the indictment with
both my eyes, expecting to meet with some count charging us with riot.
The disappointment was welcome, and I considered myself safe.  Not so,
however, by a parcel of shabby solicitors.  They said it would go hard
with any one if found guilty.  The government meant to make an example of
some of of us, as a lesson to the ill-affected, in the shape of some
fifteen years in the hulks.  They had learned from Lynn of Ballaarat that
there were no funds collected from the diggers for the defence.  'Cetera
quando rursum scribam'--and thus they won some 200 pounds out of the
frightened state prisoners, who possessed ready cash.

"What will be the end of us, Joe?" was my question to the nigger-rebel.

"Why, if the jury lets us go, I guess we'll jump our holes again on the
diggings.  If the jury won't let us go, then"--and bowing his head over
the left shoulder, poking his thumb between the windpipe and the
collarbone, opened wide his eyes, and gave such an unearthly whistle,
that I understood perfectly well what he meant.




Chapter LXXX.



The State Prisoners.
(From 'The Age', February 14th, 1855.)


The following is the copy of a letter addressed by the state prisoners now
awaiting their trial in the Melbourne Gaol, to the Sheriff, complaining
of the treatment they have received:-


Her Majesty's Gaol, Melbourne,
February 6th, 1855.
To the Sheriff of the Colony of Victoria:-

Sir--As the chief officer of the government, regulating
prison discipline in Victoria, we, the undersigned Ballaarat
state prisoners, respectfully beg to acquaint you with
the mode of our treatment since our imprisonment in this
gaol, in the hope that you will be pleased to make some
alteration for the better.

At seven o'clock in the morning we are led into a small
yard of about thirty yards long and eight wide, where
we must either stand, walk or seat ourselves upon the
cold earth (no seats or benches being afforded us), and
which at meal times serves as chair, table, etc., with
the additional consequence of having our food saturated
with sand, dust, and with every kind of disgusting filth
which the wind may happen to stir up within the yard.

We are locked in, about three o'clock in the afternoon,
four or five of us together, in a cell whose dimensions
are three feet by twelve, being thus debarred from the
free air of heaven for sixteen hours out of the twenty-four.
The food is of the very worst description ever used by
civilized beings.  We are debarred the use of writing
materials, except for purposes of pressing necessity; are
never permitted to see a newspaper; and strictly prohibited
the use of tobacco and snuff.  We have been subjected to
the annoyance of being stripped naked, a dozen men together,
when a process of 'searching' takes place that is debasing
to any human being, but perfectly revolting to men whose
sensibilities have never been blunted by familiarity with
crime--an ordeal of examination, and the coarse audacity
with which it is perpetrated, as would make manhood blush,
and which it would assuredly resent, as an outrage upon
common decency, in any other place than a prison.  And again,
when the visiting justice makes his rounds, we are made
to stand bareheaded before him, as if--etc.

We give the government the credit of believing that it is
not its wish we should be treated with such apparent malignity
and apparent malice; and also believe that if you, sir,
the representative of government in this department, had
been previously made acquainted with this mode of treatment,
you would have caused it to be altered.  But we have hitherto
refrained from troubling the government on the subject,
in expectation of a speedy trial, which now appears to be
postponed sine die.

We, each of us, can look back with laudable pride upon
our lives, and not a page in the record of the past can
unfold a single transgression which would degrade us before
man, or for which we would be condemned before our Maker.
And we naturally ask why we should be treated as if our
lives had been one succession of crime, or as if society
breathed freely once more at being rid of our dangerous
and demoralising presence.  Even the Sunday, that to all
men in Christendom is a day of relaxation and comparative
enjoyment, to us is one of gloom and weariness, being locked
up in a dreary cell from three o'clock Saturday evening
till seven on Monday morning (except for about an hour
and a half on Sunday); thus locked up in a narrow dungeon
for forty consecutive hours! We appeal to you, and ask,
was there ever worse treatment, in the worst days of the
Roman inquisition, for men whose reputation had never
been sullied with crime?

We therefore humbly submit, that, as the state looks only
at present to our being well secured, we ought to be treated
with every liberality consistent with our safe custody;
and that any unnecessary harshness, or arrogant display
of power, is nothing more or less than wanton cruelty.

Some of us, for instance, could wile away several hours
each day in writing, an occupation which, while it would
fill up the dreary vacuum of a prison life, as would the
moderate use of snuff and tobacco cheer it, and soothe
that mental irritation consequent upon seclusion.  But that
system of discipline which would paralyse the mind and
debilitate the body--that would destroy intellectual as
well as physical energy and vigour, cannot certainly be
of human origin.

Trusting you will remove these sources of annoyance and
complaint,

We beg to subscribe ourselves,
Sir
Your obedient servants.
[Here follow the names.]

-----

Sheriff CLAUDE FARIE, Inspector PRICE, Turnkey HACKETT, they will praise
your names in hell!




Chapter LXXXI.



Quem Patronem Rogaturus.


The brave people of Melbourne remembered the state prisoners, forgotten by
the Ballaarat diggers, who now that the storm was over, considered
themselves luckily cunning to have got off safe; and therefore could
afford to 'joe' again; the red-streak near Golden-point, having put every
one in the good old spirits of the good old times.


Yourself devoting to the public cause,
You ask the people if they be 'there' to die:
Yes, yes hurrah the thund'ring applause,
Too soon, alas! you find out the lie!
Cast in a gaol, at best you are thought a fool,
Red hot grows your foe; your friend too cool.

An angel, however, was sent to the undefended state prisoners.  Hayes and
myself were the first, who since our being in trouble, did grasp the hand
of a gentleman, volunteering to be our friend.

JAMES MACPHERSON GRANT, solicitor, is a Scotchman of middle-size,
middle-height; and the whole makes the man, an active man of business,
a shrewd lawyer, and up to all the dodges of his profession.  His forehead
announces that all is sound within; his benevolent countenance assures
that his heart is for man or woman in trouble.  He hates oppression; so
say his eyes.  He scorns humbug; so says his nose.  His manners declare
that he was born a gentleman.

I very soon gave him hints for my defence, quite in accordance with what
I have been stating above, and his clerk took the whole down in short-hand.
He encouraged me to be of good cheer, "You need not fear," said he,
"you will soon be out, all of you."

God bless you, Mr. Grant!  For the sake of you and Mr. Aspinall, the
barrister, I smother now my bitterness, and pass over all that I suffered
on account of so many postponements.

Timothy Hayes, when we returned broken-hearted for the FIFTH(!) time to
our gaol, did we not curse the lawyers!

A wild turn of mind now launched my soul to the old beloved spot on the
Eureka, and there I struck out the following anthem.




Chapter LXXXII.



Victoria's 'Southern Cross'.
Tune--The 'Standard Bearer'

I.

WHEN Ballaarat unfurled the 'Southern Cross,'
Of joy a shout ascended to the heavens;
The bearer was Toronto's Captain Ross;
And frightened into fits red-taped ravens.


Chorus.   For brave Lalor--
        Was found 'all there,'
        With dauntless dare:
        His men inspiring:
        To wolf or bear,
        Defiance bidding,
        He made them swear--
Be faithful to the Standard, for victory or death.  (Bis.)

II.

Blood-hounds were soon let loose, with grog imbued,
And murder stained that Sunday! Sunday morning;
The Southern Cross in digger's gore imbrued,
Was torn away, and left the diggers mourning!

Chorus.

Victoria men, to scare, stifle, or tame,
Ye quarter-deck monsters are too impotent;
The Southern Cross will float again the same,
UNITED Britons, ye are OMNIPOTENT.

Chorus.


Thus I had spanned the strings of my harp, but the strain broke them
asunder in the gaol.




Chapter LXXXIII.


Initium Sapientie Est Timor Domini.


There are circumstances in life, so inexplicable for the understanding;
so intricate for the counsel; so overwhelming for the judgment; so
tempting for the soul; so clashing with common sense; so bewildering for
the mind; so crushing for the heart; that even the honest man cannot help
at moments to believe in FATE.  Hence the 'sic sinuerunt Fata,' will dash
the fatalist ahead, and embolden him to knock down friend or foe, so as
to carry out his conceit.  If successful, he is a Caesar; if unsuccessful,
ignominy and a violent grave are the reward of his worry.

If this be true, as far as it goes, whilst

Through living hosts and changing scenes we rove,
The mart, the court, the sea, the battle-plain,
As passions sway, or accident may move;

it holds not true in a gaol.  There you must meet yourself, and you find
that you are not your God.  Hence these new strings in my harp.


TO THE POINT.

I.

Gay is the early bloom of life's first dawn,
But darker colours tinge maturer years;
Our days as they advance grow more forlorn,
Hope's brightest dreams dissolve away in tears
Which were the best, to be or not to have been?
The question may be asked, no answer can be seen.

II.

On earth we live, within our thoughts--the slaves,
Of our conceptions in each varied mood,
Gay or melancholy;--it is the waves
Of our imaginings, become the food
The spirit preys upon; and laughs or raves
With madness or with pleasure, as it would
If drunk with liquids.  WE EXIST AND DWELL
AS THE MIND MAY DISPOSE, IN HEAVEN OR IN HELL.

THEME.

Death which we dread so much, is but a name.


SONNET.

He who never did eat his bread in tears;
Who never passed a dreary bitter night,
And in his bed of sorrow, the hard fight
Of pending troubles saw, with anxious fears:
Who never an exile forlorn for years,
And never wept with Israel 'at the sight
Of the waters of Babylon' (Psalm 137), the might
Of Heaven's word is unknown to his ears.
IS THERE A MORTAL EYE THAT NEVER WEPT?
WITH tears the child begins his wants to show
In tears the man out of the earth is swept.
Whether we bless or grumble here below,
HIM who ever in His hand the world has kept
In dark affliction's school we learn to know.

(Of course my original is in Italian.)




Chapter LXXXIV.



Judica Me Deus, Et Discarne Causam Meam De Gente Non Sancta;
Ab Homine Iniquo Et Doloso Erue Me.


SUPREME COURT
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia Felix,
Wednesday, March 21st, 1855.

(Before his Honour Mr. Justice Barry.)


MY STATE TRIAL His HONOUR took his seat shortly after ten o'clock.
The prisoner, that is myself, was placed in the dock, and the following
Jury sworn (after the usual challenging):-

PHILLIP BRAGG, Gore-street, Farmer,
ALEXANDER BARTHOLOMEW, Brighton-road, Joiner,
JAMES BLACK, Greville-street, Butcher,
CHARLES BUTT, Lennox-street, Carpenter,
THOMAS BELL, Lennox-street, Carpenter,
FREDERICK BAINES, Richmond-road, Painter,
CHARLES BELFORD, Kew, Gardener,
WILLIAM BROADHURST, Wellington-street, Grocer,
JOSEPH BERRY, Hawthorne, Farmer,
DAVID BOYLE, Kew, Gardener,
WILLIAM BARNETT, Heidelberg, Gardener,
JOHN BATES, Rowena-street, Baker.

'Brava gente.  Dio vi benedica.  Mio Fratello desidera veder ciascuno
di Voi, nella nostra Bella Itallia.'

For the first time in my life (37 years old), I was placed in a felon's
dock, and before a British jury.

The first glance I gave to the foreman made me all serene.  I was sure
that the right man was in the right place.

JAMES MACPHERSON GRANT, my attorney for the defence, was 'all there.'

RICHARD DAVIS IRELAND, barrister, my counsel, was heavy with thunder.
Thick, sound, robust, round-headed as he is, the glance of his eyes is
irresistible.  A pair of bushy whiskers frame in such a shrewd forehead,
astute nose, thundering mouth; that one had better keep at a respectful
distance from drakes.  His whole head and strong-built frame tell that he
is ready to settle at once with anybody; either with the tongue or with
the fist.  His eloquence savours pretty strongly of Daniel O'Connell,
and is flavoured with colonial pepper; hence Mr. Ireland will always
exercise a potent spell over a jury.  If he were the Attorney-General,
the colony would breath freer from knaves, rogues, and vagabonds.  The
'sweeps,' especially, could not possibly prosper with Ireland's pepper.

According to promise, another lawyer, a man of flesh, had to be present:
but, as he was not there, so he is not here.

Mr. ASPINALL, barrister, totally unknown to me before, volunteered his
services as my counsel to assist Mr. Ireland.

'In memoria eterna manet amicus' BUTLER COLE ASPINALL.  The print of
generous frankness in your forehead, of benevolence in your eyes, of
having no-two-ways in your nose, of sincere boldness in your mouth;
your height, fine complexion, noble deportment, indicate in you the
gentleman and the scholar.  If now and then you fumble among papers,
whilst addressing the jury, that is perhaps for fear it should be observed
that you have no beard; in order that proper attention may be paid to your
learning, which is that of a grey-headed man; and though it may be said,
that the Eureka Stockade was hoggledy enough, yet your pop, pop, pop, was
also doggledy.

You know a tree by its fruits; and so you may know, if you like, the
Attorney-General by his High-Treason Indictment.  I have not the patience
to go through it a second time.  There are too many Fosters, fostering and
festering in this Victorian land.

JUDGE BARRY presided; a man of the old-gentleman John Bull's stamp.
Nothing in his face of the cast of a Jefferies.  He can manage his temper,
even among the vexations of law.

His Honour addressed me always with kindness.  If he shampooed his
summing-up, with parson's solemnity, indicating not little
self-congratulation, His Honour had reason to be proud of the following
remarks, which I here record for that purpose:-


"They had been told (said His Honour to the jury), that the
prisoner in the dock had come sixteen thousand miles to
get off from the Austrian rule--from the land of tyranny
to that of liberty; and so he had, in the truest sense of
the word, and that liberty which he enjoyed imposed upon
him a local respect for Her Majesty, and a respect for her
laws.  He had the privilege of being tried by a jury, who
would form their verdict solely from the facts adduced
on the trial."


A fair hint; equal to saying, that under the British flag I was not going
to be tried before the Holy (read, Infernal) Inquisition.




Chapter LXXXV.



Sunt Miserie In Vita Hominus, Viro Probo Dolosis Circumdari!
Nulla Miseria Pejor.


MY TRIAL proceeded, before the British Jury aforesaid.

Vandemonians:
HENRY GOODENOUGH, Spy-Major.
ANDREW PETERS, Sub-Spy.

As an honest man, I scorn to say anything of either of you; but address
myself to my God, the Lord God of Israel, in the words of Solomon:-

'If any man trespass against his neighbour, and an oath be laid upon him
to cause him to swear, and the oath come before thine altar in this house:

'Then hear thou in heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, condemning the
wicked to bring his way upon his head.'--(1 Kings viii. 31, 32.)

GEORGE WEBSTER examined:-
"I attended the meeting at Bakery-hill on the afternoon of the 29th
November, Mr. Hayes was chairman, and the prisoner was on the platform.
He made a speech to the effect, that he had come 16,000 miles to escape
tyranny, and they (THE DIGGERS) should put down the tyrants here (POINTING
TO THE CAMP).  PRISONER ALSO TORE UP HIS LICENCE and threw it towards the
fire recommending the others to do as he did."

N.B.--At the next state trial of Jamas Beattie, and Michael Tuhey, said
witness George Webster, on his oath, was cross examined by Mr. Ireland,
and stated:-

"Mr. RAFFAELLO, was at the meeting on the 29th November.--(A gold licence
was here handed to the witness.)--This licence is in the name of
CARBONI RAFFAELLO, and the date covers the period at which the licences
were burned."--(Sensation in the Court!)

I was present in person, and a free man.  'AB UNO DISCE OMNES:  JAM SATIS
DIXI.'  I hereby assert that I did not burn any paper or anything at all
at the monster meeting; I challenge contradiction from any bona fide
miner, who was present at said meeting.  I paid two pounds for my licence
on the 15th of October, 1854, to Commissioner Amos, and I have it still
in my possession.*

[* The original document of the following Gold-license, as well as the
documents from Davis Burwash, Esq., the eminent notary-public, of
4, Castlecourt, Birchin-lane, City, London; and Signor Carboni Raffaello's
College Diploma, and Certificate as sworn interpreter in said City of
London; together with the Originals of all other Documents, especially
the letters from C Raffaello to H. W. Archer, inserted in this book,
are now in the hands of J MacPherson Grant, Esq., M.L.C., Solicitor,
and will remain in his office, Collins-street, Melbourne, till Christmas
for inspection.--The Printers]

-----

V.R.
Printed by John Ferres at the Government Printing Office
NOT TRANSFERABLE
2 POUNDS
GOLD LICENSE.--THREE MONTHS.
No. 134.   17th October 1854.

The Bearer, Carboni Raffaello, having paid the Sum of TWO
Pounds on account of the General Revenue of the Colony,
I hereby License him to mine or dig for Gold, reside at,
or carry on, or follow any trade or calling, except that
of Storekeeper, on such Crown Lands within the Colony of
Victoria as shall be assigned to him for these purposes
by any one duly authorized in that behalf.

This License to be in force for THREE Months ending 16th
January, and no longer.

G. A. Amos.
Commissioner.

REGULATIONS TO BE OBSERVED BY THE PERSONS DIGGING FOR GOLD
OR OTHERWISE EMPLOYED AT THE GOLD FIELDS.

1. This License is to be carried on the person, to be
produced whenever demanded by any Commissioner, Peace
Officer, or other duly authorised person.

2. It is especially to be observed that this License is
not transferable, and that the holder of a transferred
Licence is liable to the penalty for a misdemeanour.

3. No Mining will be permitted where it would be destructive
of any line of road which it is necessary to maintain,
and which shall be determined by any Commissioner, nor
within such distance round any more as it may be necessary
to reserve for access to it.

4. It is enjoined that all persons on the Gold Fields
maintain a due and proper observance of Sundays.

5. The extent of claim allowed to each Licensed Miner
is twelve foot square, or 144 square &c.,&c.,&c.,

-----

Examination of this gold-laced witness continued:--'The prisoner was the
most violent speaker at the meeting.'

Good reader, see my speech at the monster meeting.  I am sick of this
witness and I will make no further comments.




Chapter LXXXVI.



Coglione, Il Lazzarone In Paragone.


CHARLES HENRY HACKETT, police magistrate, cross examined by Mr. Ireland:-

"There was a deputation admitted to an interview with Mr. Rede, on
Thursday night, November 30th.  The prisoner was one of the deputation.
I think Black was the principal party in the deputation.  The deputatation
as well as I remember, said, that they thought in case Mr. Rede would give
an assurance that he would not go out again with the police and military
to collect licences, they could undertake that no disturbance would take
place.  Mr. Rede replied, that as threats were held out to the effect,
that in case of refusal, the bloodshed would be on their (the authorities')
own heads, he could not make any such engagement at the time, nor had he
the power of refraining from collecting the licence fee."

By the prisoner:
"I recollect Commissioner Rede saying, that the word 'licences' was merely
a cloak used by the diggers, and that this movement was in reality a
democratic one.  You (prisoner) assured him that amongst the foreigners
whom you conversed with there was no democratic feeling, but merely a
spirit of resistance to the licence fee."

Mr. C. H. HACKETT you are a lover of truth:  God bless you!

JAMES GORE, examined by the Attorney-General:--
"I am a private in the 40th, I was in the attack on the Eureka stockade.
The prisoner and two other men followed me when I entered the stockade,
and compelled me to go out.  Prisoner was armed with a pike."

Cross examined by Mr. Ireland:--
"It was day-light at the time, but not broad day-light; I had fired my
musket but not used my bayonet.  I ran because there were three against
me.  I was one of the first men in the stockade.  There was no other
soldier or policeman near me when the prisoner and the other men
pursued me."

PATRICK SYNOTT, examined by the Attorney-General:--
"I am a private in the 40th regiment, I saw the prisoner and two other men
pursuing Gore from the stockade on the morning of the attack.  It was
almost as lightsome at the time as it is now.  I could distinguish a man
at fifty yards off, and the prisoner was not fifteen yards from me.  He
was six or seven minutes in my sight."

JOHN CONCRITT, examined by the Attorney-General:--
This witness was a mounted policeman and corroborated in all particulars
the evidence of the previous witnesses.

Cross examined by Mr. Ireland:--
"I fired my pistol at the prisoner.  It was very good daylight.  From what
I saw of the soldier that morning, I should have known him again, for he
stood with me for some minutes afterwards."

JOHN DONNELLY, examined by the Attorney-General:--
"I am a private of the 40th regiment.  I was at the stockade on the
3rd December; I saw the prisoner there.  I had a distinct opportunity
of seeing."

Cross examined by Mr. Ireland:-
"I saw him for about a minute at first, and I saw him again in about ten
minutes afterwards.  I also saw him at the Camp the following day."

JOHN BADCOCK, trooper, examined by the Attorney-General:--
"I was at the stockade on the morning of the 3rd December.  I was on foot.
I snapped my musket at the prisoner, and it missed fire.  I was quite
close to him.  I saw him again at the lock-up next day."

JOHN DOGHERTY, trooper, examined by the Attorney-General:--
"I was at the attack on the stockade.  I saw the prisoner there.  I knew
him personally before.  I have no doubt that he is the man.  I saw the
prisoner run towards the guard tent, and in a few minutes after, I saw him
again brought back as a prisoner."

Sergeant HAGARTEY, examined by the Attorney-General:--
"I am a sergeant in the 40th.  I was in the attack on the stockade.
I was beside Captain Wise when he was shot.  He (Captain Wise) was shot
from the stockade.  I saw the prisoner at the stockade.  I was in the
guard which took him to the Camp.  The prisoner did not get away, I know.
I saw him a prisoner in the Camp about five o'clock."

Cross examined by Mr. Ireland:--
"I do not know that the prisoner did not escape on his way from the
stockade to the lock-up."

ROBERT TULLY, sworn and examined:--
"He was inside the stockade on the Sunday morning:  saw the prisoner there
armed with a pike; he was in the act of running away; saw him twice in the
stockade; was sure the prisoner is the man."

Cross examined by Mr. Ireland:--
"Never saw the man before this; he was running in company with two other
men; it was very early in the morning; it was some time after the stockade
was taken that he was arrested; the firing then had not wholly ceased."

Private DON-SYN-GORE, drilled by sergeant HAG.

Trooper CON(S)CRIT-BAD-DOG, mobbed by Bob-tulip.

The pair of you are far below the ebb of our Neopolitan Lazzaroni!

Why did you not consult with spy Goodenough?

This having closed the case for the Crown, the Court adjourned at
half-past two.




Chapter LXXXVII.



Viri Probi, Spes Mea In Vobis; Nam Fides Nostra In Deo Optimo Maximo.


To be serious.  I am a Catholic, born of an old Roman family, whose honour
never was questioned; I hereby assert before God and man, that previous to
my being under arrest at the Camp, I never had seen the face of 1, Gore,
2, Synnot, 3, Donnelly, 4, Concritt, 5, Dogherty, 6, Badcock, 7, Hagartey,
and 8, Tully.

I CHALLENGE CONTRADICTION from any 'bona fide' digger, who was present
at the stockade during the massacre on the morning of December 3rd, 1854.

As a man of education and therefore a member of the Republic of Letters,
I hereby express the hope that the Press throughout the whole of Australia
will open their columns to any bona fide contradiction to my solemn
assertions above.  I cannot possibly say anything more on such a sad
subject.




Chapter LXXXVIII.



Sunt Leges:  Vis Ultima Lex:  Tunc Aut Libertas Aut Servitudo;
Mors Enim Benedicta.


On the reassembling of the Court, at three o'clock, Mr. Ireland rose to
address the Jury for the defence.

The learned Counsel spent a heap of dry yabber-yabber on the law of
high-treason, to show its absurdity and how its interpretation had ever
proved a vexation even to lawyers, then he tackled with some more tangible
solids.  The British law, the boast of 'urbis et orbis terrarum',
delivered a traitor to be practised upon by a sanguinary
Jack Ketch:--I., to hang the beggar until he be dead, dead, dead;
II., then to chop the carcase in quarters; III., never mind the stench,
each piece of the treacherous flesh must remain stuck up at the top of
each gate of the town, there to dry in spite of occasional pecking from
crows and vultures.  The whole performance to impress the young generation
with the fear of God and teach them to honour the King.

I soon reconciled myself to my lot, and remembering my younger days at
school, I argued thus:--

Where there are no bricks, there are no walls:  but, walls are required
to enclose the gates; therefore, in Ballaarat there are no gates.
Corolarium--How the deuce can they hang up my hind-quarters on the gates
of Ballaarat Township?  Hence, Toorak must possess a craft which passes
all understanding of Traitors.

The jury, however, appeared frightened at this powerful thundering from
Mr. Ireland, who now began to turn the law towards a respectable and more
congenial quarter, and proved, that if the prisoner at the bar had burnt
down all the brothels not kept on the sly in Her Majesty's dominions,
he would be a Traitor; yet, if he had left one single brothel
standing--say, in the Sandwich Islands--for the accommodation of any of
Her Majesty's well-affected subjects, then the high treason was not
high--high enough and up to the mark, that is, my fore-quarter could not
be legally stuck up on the imaginary gates of Ballaarat.

His Honour appeared to me, to assent to the line of argument of the
Learned Counsel, who concluded a very lengthy but most able address,
by calling on the jury to put an end by their verdict to the continued
incarceration of the man, and to teach the government that they could not
escape from the responsibilities they had incurred by their folly, by
trying to obtain a verdict, which would brand the subjects of Her Majesty
in this Colony with disloyalty.

The jury now appeared to me to be ready to let the high traitor go
his way in bodily integrity.

Mr. ASPINALL then rose to address the jury on behalf of the prisoner.
His speech was spirited, cutting, withering; but could only cover the
falsehood, and NOT bring to light the truth:  hence to record his speech
here cannot possibly serve the purpose of this Book:  hence the four
documents, and my important observation on them in the following chapter.




Chapter LXXXIX.



Melior Nunc Lingua Favere.


Document I.

SUPREME COURT
(Before his Honour the Chief Justice,)

"The prisoner, Raffaello, on his trial being postponed, wished to address
His Honour.  He said that he was a native of Rome, and hoped that the same
good feeling would be shown towards him in this colony as in old England.
If his witnesses were there, he would be able to leave the dock at that
moment.  He hoped that His Honour would protect him by seeing that his
witnesses were served with subpoenas.

"His Honour was not responsible for this.  Prisoner's attorney was the
party, and he must speak to him.  It is the business of your attorney
to get these witnesses."

The following advertisement appeared in 'The Age', February 24th, 1855,
immediately above the leading article of said day:-


Document II.

State Trials.

"The trial of Raffaello has been postponed on account of the absence of
Dr. Alfred Carr, Mr. Gordon, of the store of Gordon and M`Callum, and
other witnesses for the defence.  It is earnestly requested that they
will be in attendance on Monday morning at latest.

"J.  MACPHERSON GRANT,
"Solicitor for the defence."


The following letter, and comment on it, appeared in 'The Age',
March 16th, 1855:-


Document III.

..."I was, Mr. Editor, present at Ballaarat on the memorable morning of
the 3rd December, and in the pursuit of my usual avocation, happened to
meet Raffaello, now one of the state prisoners, on the Redhill, he being
then in search of Dr. Carr's hospital...  We were directed the hospital,
and soon returned to the Eureka, Raffaello bringing Dr. Carr's surgical
instruments.  We entered the stockade, and saw many lying almost dead for
want of assistance and from loss of blood, caused by gun-shot and bayonet
wounds.  I did not remain long in the stockade, fearing if found there at
that time I would be arrested.  I made my escape; but poor Raffaello,
who remained rendering an act of mercy to the dying, would not leave.
He might, during that time, have easily made his escape, if he wished to
do so; and I am sure, ran no inconsiderable risk of being shot, through
the constant explosion of fire-arms left in the stockade by the diggers
in their retreat.

"J.B."


"Melbourne, 15th March, 1854.

"The writer of the above states, in a private note, that he wishes his
name kept secret; but we trust that his intimacy with the Camp officials
will not prevent him from coming forward to save the life of a fellow
creature, when the blood-hounds of the government are yelling with anxiety
to fasten their fangs upon their victims."--Ed. A.

'The Age' who certainly never got drunk yet on Toorak small-beer, had an
able leading article, headed, 'The State Trials'--see January 15th--
concluding, "If they be found guilty, then Heaven help the poor State
Prisoners."  Now turn the medal, and 'The Age' of March 26th--always the
same year, 1855--that is, the day after my acquittal, gives copy of a Bill
of the 'LAST PERFORMANCE; or, the Plotters Outwitted.'


Document IV.

"To-day, the familiar farce of 'STATE PROSECUTIONS; or, the Plotters
Outwitted,' will be again performed, and positively for the last time;
on which occasion that first-rate performer, Mr. W. F. Stawell, will
(by special desire of a distinguished personage) repeat his well-known
impersonation of Tartuffe, with all the speeches, the mock gravity, etc.,
which have given such immense satisfaction to the public on former
occasions.  This eminent low comedian will be ably supported by
Messrs. Goodenough and Peters, so famous for their successful
impersonations of gold-diggers; and it is expected that they will both
appear in full diggers' costume, such as they wore on the day when they
knelt before the 'Southern Cross,' and swore to protect their rights and
liberties.  The whole will be under the direction of that capital stage
manager, Mr. R. Barry, who will take occasion to repeat his celebrated
epilogue, in which he will--if the audience demand it--introduce again his
finely melodramatic apostrophe to the thunder.

"With such a programme, what but an exceedingly successful farce can be
anticipated?  A little overdone by excessive repetition, it may be said;
but still an admirable farce; and, as we have said, this is positively
the last performance.  Therefore, let it go on; or as Jack Falstaff says,
'play out the play.'"


Of course, I leave it to my good reader to guess, whether after four long
months in gaol, which ruined my health for ever, I did laugh or curse on
reading the above.

Concerning the four documents above, so far so good for the present;
and the Farce will be produced on the stage of 'Teatro' Argentina, Roma,
by Great-works.  The importance of the following observation, however,
is obvious to any reader who took the proper trouble to understand the
text of the first chapter of this book.

Why Dr. A. Carr, Sub-inspector Carter, Messrs. Gordon and Binney were not
present as witnesses on my trial, was, and is still, a MYSTERY to me.

'Sunt tempora nostra! nam perdidi spem:  Melior nunc lingua favere.'




Chapter XC.



Peccator Videbit Et Irascetur; Dentibus Suis Fremet Et Tabescet:
Desiderium Peccatorum Peribit.


AT the end of Mr. Aspinall's able oration, the jury appeared to me, to be
decidedly willing to let me go, with an admonition to sin no more:
because Mr. Aspinall took the same line of defence as Mr. Michie, the
counsel in the trial of John Manning; that is, he confessed to the riot,
but laughed at the treason.  However rashly the diggers had acted in
taking up arms, however higgledy-piggledy had been the management of the
stockade, yet they were justified in resisting unconstitutional force
by force.

His Honour tried the patience of the jury; well knowing by experience,
that twelve true-born Britons can always afford to put up with a good
long yarn.

The jury retired at nine o'clock.  My first thought was directed to the
Lord my God and my Redeemer.  Then naturally enough, to sustain my
courage, I was among my dear friends at Rome and London.

To remain in the felon's dock whilst your JURY consult on your fate,
is a sensation very peculiar in its kind.  To be or not to be; that is the
actual matter-of-fact question.  Three letters making up the most
important monosyllable in the language, which if pronounced is life, if
omitted is death:  an awkward position for an innocent man especially.

The jury, after twenty minutes past nine, were again in the jury-box.
I was satisfied by their countenances that 'the People' were victorious.

The Clerk of the Court:  "Gentlemen of the Jury, have you considered
your verdict?"

Foreman:  "We have."

The Clerk:  "Do you find the prisoner at the bar Guilty or Not Guilty?"

Foreman, with a firm voice:  "NOT GUILTY!"

'Magna opera Domini'--(God save the People)--thus my chains sprang
asunder.  The people inside telegraphed the good news to the crowd
outside, and "Hurrah!" rent the air in the old British style.




Chapter XCI.



Accidenti Alle Spie.


I WAS soon at the portal of the Supreme Court, a free man.  I thought the
people would have smothered me in their demonstrations of joy.  Requesting
silence, I stretched forth my right hand towards heaven, and with the
earnestness of a Christian did pray as follows:--I hereby transcribe the
prayer as written in pencil on paper whilst in gaol in the lower cell,
No. 33.

"LORD GOD OF ISRAEL, our Father in Heaven! we acknowledge our
transgressions since we came into this our adopted land.  Intemperance,
greediness, the pampering of many bad passions, have provoked Thee against
us; yet, Oh, Lord our God, if in thy justice, Thou are called upon to
chastise us, in Thy mercy save this land of Victoria from the curse of the
'spy system.'"

Timothy Hayes answered, "Amen," and so did all the people, present, and so
will my good reader answer, Amen.




Chapter XCII. & XCIII.



TO LET, No. 33, LOWER CRIBS, IN WINTLE'S HOTEL, NORTH MELBOURNE.


See 'Geelong Advertiser', November 18th.
MACKAY v. HARRISON.
'Merci bien, je sors d'en prendre.'

The pair of chapters will see darkness 'SINE DIE'; that is, if under
another flag, also in another language.

GREAT-WORKS.

'Hesperia! Quando Ego te Auspiciam? Quandoque Licebit Nunc Veterum Libris,
Nunc Somno Et Inertibus Horis, Ducere Solicitae Licunda Oblivia Vitae.'




Chapter XCIV.



EXPLANATION,
TO BE SUBMITTED TO
HER MOST GRACIOUS MAJESTY
QUEEN VICTORIA, LONDON,
AND TO
HIS HOLINESS PIUS IX., PONTIFEX MAXIMUS,
ROME.
BY
MY BROTHER DON ANTONIO CARBONI, D.D.,
Head-master of the Grammar School, Coriano, Romagna.

-----

'Homo Sum, Nil Humani a me Alienum Puto.'

How do I explain, that I allowed one full year to pass away before
publishing my story, whilst many, soon after my acquittal, heard me in
person, corroborate, not indeed boastingly, the impression that I was the
identical brave fellow before whose pike a British soldier was coward
enough to run away.

I have one excuse, and 'it is an excuse.'

The cast of mind which Providence was pleased to assign me was terribly
shaken during four long, long months suffering in gaol, especially,
considering the company I was in, which was my misery.  The excitement
during my trial, my glorious acquittal by a British jury, the hearty
acclamations of joy from the people, made me put up with the ignominy
and the impotent teeth-gnashing of silver and gold lace; and for the cause
of the diggers to which I was sincerely attached, I was not sorry at the
Toorak spiders having lent me the wings of an hero--the principal foreign
hero of the Eureka stockade.  My credit consists now in having the moral
courage to assert the truth among living witnesses.

"And I proposed in my mind to seek and search out wisely concerning all
things that are done under the sun.  This painful occupation hath God
given to the children of men to be exercised therein.  I have seen all
things that are done under the sun, and behold all is vanity and vexation
of spirit."--The Preacher, chap. 1st, v. 13, 14.




Chapter XCV.



Qui Potest Capere Capiat.


ELECTION.
OLD SPOT, BAKERY-HILL, BALLAARAT.

According to notice, a Public Meeting was held on Saturday, July 14th,
1855, for the election of nine fit and proper men to act as Members of
the Local Court--the offspring of the Eureka Stockade.

The Resident Warden in the Chair.  Names of the Members elected for the
FIRST LOCAL COURT, Ballaarat:-

I.    JAMES RYCE, elected Unanimously.
II.   ROBERT DONALD, elected Unanimously.
III.  CARBONI RAFFAELLO, elected Unanimously.
IV.   JOHN YATES, elected Unanimously.
V.    WILLIAM GREEN, elected Unanimously.
VI.   EDWARD MILLIGAN, elected by a majority of 287 votes.
VII.  JOHN WALL, elected by a majority of 240 votes.
VIII. THOMAS CHIDLOW, elected by a majority of 187 votes.
IX.   H. R. NICHOLLS, elected by a majority of 163 votes.


The first time I went to our Court, I naturally stopped under the
gum-tree--before the Local Court Building--at the identical spot where
Father P. Smyth, George Black, and myself delivered to the Camp
authorities our message of peace, for preventing bloodshed, on the night
of Thursday, November 30th, 1854, by moonlight.  We were then not
successful.

Now, I made a covenant with the Lord God of Israel that if I comparatively
regained my former health and good spirits, I would speak out the truth;
and further, during my six months' sitting in the Court, I would give
right to whom right was due, and smother the knaves, irrespective of
nationality, religion, or colour.

I kept my word--that is, my bond is now at an end.

I hereby resign into the hands of my fellow-diggers the trust reposed in
me as one of their arbitrators:  after Christmas, 1855, I shall not sit
in the Local Court.  With clean hands I came in, with clean hands I go
out:  that is the testimony of my conscience.  I look for no other reward.

(Signed) CARBONI RAFFAELLO.
Dec. 1st, 1855.




Chapter XCVI.



Est Modus In Rebus:  Sunt Certi Denique Fines, Quos Ultrae,
Citraque Nequit Consistere Rectum.


Have I anything more to say?  Oh! yes, mate; a string of the realities of
the things of this world.

Some one who had been spouting, stumping, and blathering--known as
moral-force 'starring'--in 'urbe et argo', for the benefit of the state
prisoners, had for myself personally not humanity enough to attend to a
simple request.  He could afford to ride 'on coachey,' I had to tramp my
way to Ballaarat.  I wished him to call at my tent on the Eureka, and see
that my stretcher was ready for my weary limbs.

Full stop.  My right hand shakes like a reed in a storm; my eyes swell
from a flood of tears.  I can control the bitterness of my heart, and say,
"So far shalt thou go;" but I cannot control its ebb and flow:  just now
is springtide.

If I must again name a noble-hearted German, Carl Wiesenhavern, of the
Prince Albert Hotel, who was my good Samaritan, I must also annex the
following three documents, because my friends in Rome and Turin may take
my wrongs too much to heart!




Chapter XCVII.



The End Of Men Whose Word Is Their Bond.

(Per favour of 'The Times'.)


"On the disgraced Sunday morning, December 3rd, whilst attending the
wounded diggers at the London Hotel, I was arrested by seven troopers,
handcuffed, and dragged to the Camp.  On my arrival there, I was commanded
to strip to the bare shirt; whilst so doing I was kicked, knocked about,
and at last thrown into the lock-up by half-drunken troopers and soldiers.
My money, clothes, and watertight boots, which were quite new, could
nowhere be found at the Camp.  Gaoler Nixon had bolted.

"From the confusion and excitement of that morning, I cannot say with
certainty the whole extent of my loss; but I can conscientiously declare
that it amounted to 30 pounds.  The only thing which I saved was a little
bag, containing some Eureka dust, and my 'Gold-licence', which Inspector
Foster, who knew me, took charge of previous to my ill-treatment, and has
subsequently handed over to Father P. Smyth for me.

"Awaiting my trial in the Melbourne gaol, I made my 'complaint' to the
visiting justice, for the recovery of my property; but as I had not even
a dog to visit me in prison, so my complaint remained unnoticed.  After
all, said worshipful the visiting justice (who was ushered into our yard
with 'Fall in, hats off!'), needs more power to him, as Joseph, the
nigger-rebel, for the 8 pounds, which had been robbed from him in due form
at the Camp, had the consolation to be informed by his worshipful that
gaoler Nixon had bolted.

"The glorious 'Not Guilty' from a British jury having restored me to my
former position in society, I embodied my 'claim' for restitution in a
constitutional form, and had it presented by a gentleman to the Colonial
Secretary, to be submitted for his Excellency's KIND Consideration.
His Excellency, soon after my trial, on being assured of my testimonials
to character and education, condescended to say, 'He was glad to hear I
was so respectable;' but His Excellency has not yet been pleased to
command the restitution of my property.

"Disappointed, in bad health, and worse spirits, I tramped for Ballaarat,
where I found that my tent, on the Eureka, had been robbed of everything
that was worth literally a sixpence--cradle, two tubs, digging tools,
cooking utensils, all gone, even my very blankets! and, of course, all my
little gold in specimens and dust, as well as my belt with money in it.

"From my account-book I can positively say, that on the fatal morning I
was arrested, the money I had on my possession, and what I had in my tent
in real cash, was 49 pounds.  ALL OF WHICH I had earned by the sweat of
my brow, honestly, through downright hard work.

"During the whole of last season, on the Eureka, who was the first every
morning, between four and five to sing out 'Great works?' Who was the last
dilly-dallying at the cradle after sunset? I appeal to my fellow-diggers,
and with confidence.

"Brooding over the strange ups and down of life, I found some consolation
in the hearty cheers with which I was saluted at the Adelphi Theatre for
my song--

   'When Ballaarat unfurled the Southern Cross;'

and I had the peculiar sensation on that particular night to lie down on
my stretcher very hungry!

"'Heu mihi! pingui quam macer est mihi taurus in arvo!' and it must be
acknowledged that it would have been paying an honest and educated man
a better compliment if my neighbours on the Eureka had found less
edification in witnessing my nice snug tent converted into a gambling
house by day, and a brothel by night.  A sad reflection! however merry
some scoundrels may have made in getting drunk with my private brandy
in the tent.

"Never mind! the diggers have now a legion of friends.  So I prevailed on
myself to tell, half-a-dozen times over to most of the 'well-disposed
and independent' yabber-yabber leaders on Ballaarat, how I had been robbed
at the Camp, how for my sorrows every mortal thing had been stolen from my
tent, and concluded with the remark, 'that in each case the thieves were
neither Vandemonians nor Chinese.'

"I met with grand sympathy in 'words,' superlatively impotent even to move
for the restitution of my watertight boots!

"Hurrah! glorious things will be told of thee, Victoria!

"These waterhole skippers, who afford buzzing and bamboozling when the
rainbow dazzles their dull eyes, bask in their 'well-affected' brains,
the flaring presumption that 'shortly' there will be a demand for sheeps'
heads! (Great works!) and pointing at several of us, it is given unto them
to behold with glory 'the end of men whose word is their bond!'

"(Great works!)

"Let us sing with Horace--

TUNE--Old Style.


Quando prosperus et jucundus,
Amicorum es fecundus,
Si fortuna perit,
Nullus amicus erit.
    Chorus--Cives! Cives!
    Querenda pecunia primum,
    Post nummos virtus.

"Which in English may mean this--


'A friend in need is a friend indeed,' that's true,
But love now-a-days is left on the shelf,
The best of friends, by G---- in serving you
Takes precious care first to help himself.
Ancestors, learning, talent, what we call
Virtue, religion--MONEY beats them all.

"I must now try the power of my old quill, perhaps it has not lost
the spell--

"In Rome, by my position in society, and thorough knowledge of the English
language, I was now and then of service to Englishmen THERE; in my
adversity is there a generous-hearted Englishman HERE who would give me
the hand and see that the government enjoins the restitution of the
property I was robbed of at the Camp.  Let the restitution come from a
Board of Inquiry, a Poor-law Board, a Court-Martial, or any Board except
a Board (full) of Petitions.  The eternal petitioning looks so 'Italian'
to me! And, especially, let the restitution of my new water-tight boots
be done this winter!

"As for the ignominy I was subjected to, my immense sufferings during four
long, long months in gaol, the prospects of my life smothered for a while,
we had better leave that alone for the present.

"Were I owned by the stars and stripes, I should not require assistance,
of course not; unhappily for the sins of my parents, I was born under
the keys which verily open the gates of heaven and hell; but Great Britain
changed the padlocks long ago! hence the dreaded 'Civis Romanus sum'
has dwindled into 'bottomed on mullock.'

"CARBONI RAFFAELLO,
"By the grace of spy Goodenough Captain of Foreign Anarchist.
"Prince Albert Hotel, Ballaarat,
"Corpus Christi, 1855."

-----

No one did condescend to notice the above letter.  I do not wonder
at it, and why?

I read in the Saturday's issue of 'The Star', Ballaarat, October 6th,
1855, how a well-known digger and now a J.P., did, in a
'Ballaarat smasher,' toast the good exit of a successful money-maker--an
active, wide-awake man of business certainly, but nothing else to the
diggers of Ballaarat--'Cela n'est pas tout-a-fait comme chez nous.'




Chapter XCVIII.



Sunt Tempora Nostra!
That Is The Following From Toorak.


Colonial Secretary's Office, Melbourne,
October 8th, 1855.

Sir,--Advertising to your correspondence (September 30th), in reply to my
letter of the 20th ultimo, I am directed by His Excellency to state that
government are compelled to adhere to fixed rules--THEY BY NO MEANS DOUBT
THE VERACITY OF YOUR STATEMENT, but they have a duty to the public to
perform, which imposes the necessity of never granting money in
compensation, except when the clearest evidence of the loss is given,
and that a personal statement no matter by whom given, is never accepted
as sufficient testimony.

I have the honour to be,
SIR,
J. MOORE, A.C.S."
(To) Mr. CARBONI RAFFAELLO,
Gravel-pits, Ballaarat-flat.

-----

A 'Cheer-up' written for the MAGPIE of BALLAARAT, perched on the Southern
Cross Hotel, Magpie-gully.

No more from MOORE;
Too dear! his store.
Hang the 'Compensation:'
Speak of 'RESTITUTION!'
'Do not steal!'
'Restiuere?'
's an old Institution,
Popish innovation.
CHORUS.
COO-HEE! Great works at Toorak!
COO-HEE! Keep clear of th' WOOL-pack.


WATERLOOBOLTER CHIMES.
SIP   sop   stir-up   Toorak       small   beer
do    si    la sol    fa me        re      do
Nip  nap    wash down chops nacks  oh!     dear.




Chapter XCIX.



Suppose I give now the kind (!) answer from Police-inspector HENRY FOSTER!
it will give general satisfaction, I think:-


Police Department,
Ballaarat, Nov. 2, 1854.

Sir,--In reply to your communication, dated 26th ultimo, on the subject of
your having been deprived of your clothing during your arrest at this
Camp, in December, 1855 [I think, Mr. Foster, it was in 1854] I have the
honour to inform you, that to the best of my recollection, the clothing
you wore when you were brought to the Camp consisted of a wide-awake hat,
or cap, a red shirt, corduroy or moleskin trousers, and a pair of boots.

Of these articles, the cap, shirt, and boots were put amongst the surplus
clothing taken from the other prisoners, and I am not aware how they were
disposed of afterwards.

I must add, that the shirt alluded to was made of wool, under which you
wore a cotton one, the latter of which you retained during your
confinement.

I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
HENRY FOSTER,
Inspector of Police.

(To) SIGNOR CARBONI RAFFAELLO.
Ballaarat.

-----

My money is not mentioned though!  Very clever:  and yet I know it was not
Foster who did rob me.

However, good reader, if you believe that a Ballaarat miner, of sober
habits and hard at work, has not got about his person, say a couple of
one pound rags, well...there let's shut up the book at once, and here
is the

END


P.S. If John Bull, cross-breed or pure blood, had been robbed in Italy,
half less wantonly, and twice less cruelly, than myself, the whole British
press and palaver 'in urbe or orbe terrarum' would have rung the chimes
against Popish gendarmes and the holy (!) inquisition of the scarlet city.
So far so good.

A friendless Italian is ROBBED under arrest on British ground, close by
the British flag, by British troopers and traps:  oh! that alters the case.

What business have these foreign beggars to come and dig for gold on
British Crown lands?

BASTA COSI; 'that is', Great works!




Chapter C.



WANTED--Stuff, Anyhow, For The Last Chapter.


If 'The Age', always foremost in the cause of the digger, never mind his
language or colour; if 'The Argus' would drop the appending 'a foreigner'
to my name, and extend even unto me the old motto 'fair-play;' if
'The Herald' would set up the pedestal for me whom it has erected as a
'MONUMENT OF GRATITUDE;' I say, if the gentlemen Editors of the Melbourne
Press, on the score of my being an old Collaborateur of the European
Press, would for once give a pull, a strong pull, and a pull altogether,
to drag out of the Toorak small-beer jug, the correspondence on the above
matter between

1.  SIR CHARLES HOTHAM, K.C.B.
2.  W. C. HAINES, C.S.
3.  W. FOSTER STAWELL, A.G.
4.  Mr. STURT, Police Magistrate.
5.  W. H. ARCHER, A.R.G.
6.  CAPTAIN M`MAHON.
7.  POLICE-INSPECTOR H. FOSTER.
8.  Another whom I detest to name, and
9.  SIGNOR CARBONI RAFFAELLO, M.L.C. of Ballaarat,

it would astonish the natives, teach what emigration is, and I believe
the colony at large would be benefited by it.

There are scores of cases similar to mine, and more important by far,
because widows and orphans are concerned in them.  'Sunt tempora nostra!'

Master Punch, do join the chorus; spirited little dear! won't you give a
lift to Great-works?  Spare not, young chip, or else, the jackasses in the
Australian bush will breed as numerous as the locusts in the African desert.

It is not FEAR that makes me shake at chapters XCII and XCIII.
Good reader, to the last line of this book, my quill shall stick to my
word as given in the first chapter.  Hence, for the present, this is the
LAST.  Put by carefully the pipe, we may want it again:  meanwhile,
FAREWELL.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EUREKA STOCKADE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Abraham Lincoln
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Abraham Lincoln
        A memorial discourse

Author: T. M. Eddy


        
Release date: June 9, 2006 [eBook #18540]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/18540

Credits: Produced by The University of Michigan's Making of America online book collection (http://www.hti.umich.edu/m/moa/)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ABRAHAM LINCOLN ***




Produced by The University of Michigan's Making of America
online book collection (http://www.hti.umich.edu/m/moa/).






ABRAHAM LINCOLN.

A

MEMORIAL DISCOURSE,



By Rev. T. M. Eddy, D. D.,



Delivered at a

Union Meeting, held in the Presbyterian Church,


Waukegan Illinois,


Wednesday, April 19, 1865,



The day upon which the funeral services of the president were
conducted in Washington, and observed throughout the loyal states as
one of mourning.




Published by request.



Chicago:

Printed at the Methodist Book Depository.



Charles Philbrick, Printer.

1865.





CORRESPONDENCE.


Waukegan, April 19, 1865.


Rev. T. M. Eddy, D. D.:



The undersigned having listened with much interest and profit to
your eloquent eulogy this day spoken before the citizens of this
town, upon the Life and Death of President Lincoln, unite in
requesting a copy for publication. We feel that much good would come
to the community from a calm perusal of the thoughts so fitly uttered
on the occasion.


H. W. Blodgett,
D. Brewster,
C. W. Upton,
W. H. P. Wright,
W. J. Lucas,
C. L. Wright,
C. G. Buell,
M. M. Biddlecew,
P. W. Edwards,
A. P. Yard,
B. S. Kennicott,
Wm. C. Tiffany,
S. S. Greenleaf,
R. Douglas,
Joseph Mallon,
James Y. Cory.



Editorial Rooms, Northwestern Christian Advocate, 66 Washington
Street, Chicago, April 24, 1865.



Messrs. Blodgett, Upton and Others:


    Gentlemen--Your note is before me. You know the time for the
preparation of that discourse was very brief. You are also aware,
doubtless, that though spoken from copious notes, much of it was
extemporized, and that I cannot reproduce those passages. But such as
it is, I place it in your hands, as my humble tribute to the name and
the virtues of our murdered President.

    With much respect, gentlemen,

          Yours truly,

          T. M. Eddy.





MEMORIAL DISCOURSE.



"In the day of adversity consider."



It _is_ the day of adversity. A great grief throws its shadow over
heart and hearth and home. There is such a sorrow as this land never
knew before; agony such as never until now wrung the heart of the
nation. In mansion and cottage, alike, do the people bow themselves.

We have been through the Red Sea of war, and across the weary,
desert marches of griefs and bereavements, but heretofore we have
felt that _our leader_ was with us, and believed that surely as Moses
was led by the pillar of cloud and of fire, so did God lead him.

But now that leader is not. Slain, slain by the hand of the
assassin, murdered beside his wife! The costliest blood has been
shed, the clearest eye is closed, the strongest arm is nerveless--the
Chief Magistrate is no more. "The mighty man cries bitterly; the day
is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of wasteness
and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and
thick darkness."

It is no mere official mourning which hangs its sad drapery
everywhere. It is not alone that a President of the Republic is, for
the first time, assassinated. No; there is a tender grief that
characterizes the bereavement of a loved friend, which shows there
was something in this man which grappled him to men's hearts as with
hooks of steel.

But mourning the death of the Chief Magistrate, it becomes us to
review the elements of his career as a ruler, which have so endeared
him to loyal hearts.

If I were to sketch the model statesman, I would say he must have
mental breadth and clearness, incorruptible integrity, strength of
will, tireless patience, humanity, preserved from demoralizing
weakness by conscientious reverence for law, ardent love of country,
and, regulating all, a commanding sense of responsibility to God, the
Judge of all. These, though wrapped in seeming rustic garb, were
found in Abraham Lincoln. He had mental breadth and clearness. In
spite of a defective early education, he became a self-taught
thinker, and later in life he read widely and meditated profoundly,
until he acquired a thorough mental discipline. He possessed the
power to comprehend a subject at once in the aggregate and in its
details. His eye swept a wide horizon and descried clearly all within
its circumference. He was a keen logician, whose apt manner of
"putting things" made him more than a match for practiced
diplomatists and wily marplots. These were men of might about his
council-board, scholars and statesmen, but none arose to his
altitude, much less was either his master.

That very facetiousness sometimes critcised, kept him from becoming
morbid, and gave healthfulness to his opinions, free alike from fever
and paralysis. That his was incorruptible integrity, no man dare
question. He was not merely above reproach, but eminently above
suspicion. Purity is receptive. "Blessed are the pure in heart, for
they shall _see God_," is as profound in philosophy as comprehensive
in theology. Purity in the realm of moral decision and motive, is a
skylight to the soul, through which truth comes direct. Abraham
Lincoln was so pure in motive and purpose, looked so intensely after
the right that he might pursue it, that he saw clearly where many
walked in mist.

Without developing the characteristics of the ideal statesman
analytically, let us see how they were manifest in his administration.

It began amid the rockings of rebellion. A servile predecessor,
deplorably weak, if not criminal, had permitted treason to be freely
mouthed in the national capitol, treasonable action to be taken by
State authorities, and armed treason to resist and defy federal
authority, and environ with bristling works the forts and flag of the
Union. At such a juncture, Mr. Lincoln, then barely escaping
assassination, was inaugurated. As was right, he made all proper
efforts for conciliation, tendered the olive-branch, proposed such
changes as existing laws, and even of the Constitution, as should
secure Southern rights from the adverse legislation of a sectional
majority. All was refused, and traitors said, "We will not live with
you. Though you sign a blank sheet and leave us to fill it with our
own conditions, we will not abide with you."

Refusing peace, war was commenced, not by the President, but by
secessionists. War has been waged on a scale of astounding vastness
for four years, and Mr. Lincoln falls as the day of victory dawns.

His claim to the character of a great statesman is to be estimated
in view of the fiery ordeal which tried him, and not by the gauge of
peaceful days. In addition to the most powerful armed rebellion ever
organized, he was confronted by a skillful, able, persistent, well
compacted partisan opposition. He was to harmonize sectional feelings
as antagonistic as Massachusetts and Kentucky, and to rally to one
flag generals as widely apart in sentiment and policy as Phelps and
Fitz John Porter. That under such difficulties he sometimes erred in
judgment and occasionally failed in execution, is not strange, for he
was a man, but that he erred so seldom, and that he so admirably
retrieved his mistakes, shows that he was more by far than an
ordinary man; more by far than an average statesman. Standing where
we do today, we feel that he was divinely appointed for the crisis;
that he was chosen to be the Moses of our pilgrimage, albeit, he was
to die at Pisgah and be buried against Beth-Peor, while a Joshua
should be commissioned to lead us into the land of promise.

In studying the administration of these four eventful years, it
seems to me there were four grand landmarks of principle governing
him, ever visible to the eye of the President, by which he steadily
made his way.


I.  THE UNION IS INCAPABLE OF DIVISION.

In his first Inaugural, he said: "I hold that in contemplation of
universal law and of the Constitution, the Union of these States is
perpetual." In his reply to Fernando Wood, then Mayor of New York, he
said, "There is nothing that could ever bring me willingly to consent
to the destruction of the Union." By this rule he walked. The Union
was one for all time, and there was no authority for its division
lodged anywhere. He would use no force, would exercise no authority
not needed for this purpose. But what force _was_ needed, whether
moral or physical, should be employed. Hence the call for troops.
Hence the marching armies of the Republic, and the thunder of cannon
at the gates of Vicksburg, Charleston and Richmond. Hence the
suspension of the _habeas corpus_, the seizure and occasional
imprisonment of treason-shriekers and sympathizers, for which he has
been denounced as a tyrant by journals, which, slandering him while
living, have the effrontery to put on the semblance of grief and
throw lying emblems of mourning to the wind! For the exercise of that
authority, he went for trial to the American people, and they
triumphantly sustained him.


II.  The second grand regulating idea of his administration may be
best stated in his own words: "GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE BY THE
PEOPLE, FOR THE PEOPLE." He conceded the people _to be the
Government_. Their will was above the opinion of secretaries and
generals. He recognized their right to dictate the policy of the
administration. Their majesty was ever before him as an actual
presence. On the 11th of February, 1861, he said, in Indianapolis,
"Of the people when they rise in mass in behalf of the Union and the
liberties of their country, it may be said, 'The gates of hell shall
not prevail against them,'" and again, "I appeal to you to constantly
bear in mind that with you, and not with politicians, not with the
President, not with office-seekers, but _with you_ rests the
question, Shall the Union and shall the liberties of this country be
preserved to the latest generation?" Again, on that memorable journey
to Washington, he said, "It is with you, the people, to advance the
great cause of the Union and the Constitution." "I am sure I bring a
true heart to the work. For the ability to perform it, I must trust
in that Supreme Being who has never foresaken this favored land,
through the instrumentality of this great and intelligent people." In
his first Inaugural he said: "This country, with its institutions,
belongs to the people who inhabit it." "The Chief Magistrate derives
all his authority from the people." "Why should there not be a
patient confidence in the ultimate justice of the people? Is there
any better or any equal hope in the world?"

These sentences were utterances of a faith within him. In the people
he had faith. He saw them only lower than the King of kings, and they
were to be trusted and obeyed.

Yet this man who thus trusted and honored the people, who so
reverenced their authority, and bowed before their majesty, has been
called "tyrant," "usurper," by men who now would make the world
forget their infamy by putting on badges of woe, and who seek to wash
out the record of their slander by such tears as crocodiles shed! Out
upon the miserable dissemblers!

When the people had spoken, he bowed to their mandate. When it
became necessary to anticipate their decision, he did so, calmly
trusting their integrity and intelligence. He considered their wishes
in the constitution of his cabinet, in the choice of military
commanders, in the appointment of Chief Justice of the Supreme Court
of the United States, and in the measures he recommended to Congress.

The people proved worthy of the trust. They promptly took every loan
asked for the relief of the treasury and sustained the national
credit. They answered all his calls for men. They sprang into the
ranks, shouting

    "We are coming, Father Abraham."

They cheerfully laid down life at his word. So far from this
conflict proving a republic unfit to make war, or that for its
prosecution there must be intensely centralized authority, it has
demonstrated that a democracy trusted, is mightier than a
dictatorship.


III.  His third towering landmark was THE RIGHT OF ALL MEN TO
FREEDOM. And here with his practical sense and acute vision he rose
to a higher, and I think a healthier, elevation than that of many
heroic antislavery leaders. They _were_ anti-slavery. Their lives
were spent in attack. They sought to destroy a system; they told its
wrongs and categoried its iniquities.

He knew that light, let in, will cast out darkness, and that kindled
warmth will drive out cold. He knew that freedom was better than
slavery, and that when men see that it is so, they will decree
freedom instead of slavery. He therefore entered the lists FOR
FREEDOM. He spoke of its inestimable blessings, and then unrolling
the immortal Declaration of Independence claimed that, with all its
dignity and all its endowments, liberty is the birthright of ALL MEN.
He taught the American people that the inalienable right of all men
to liberty was the first utterance of the young Republic, and that
her voice must be stifled so long as slavery lives. In his Ottawa
speech he said: "Henry Clay--my beau-ideal of a statesman--the man
for whom I fought all my humble life, once said of a class of men who
would repress all tendencies to liberty and ultimate emancipation,
that they must, if they would do this, go back to the era of our
independence and muzzle the cannon which thunders its annual joyous
return; they must blow out the moral lights around us, they must
penetrate the human soul and eradicate there the love of liberty, and
then, and not till then, could they perpetuate slavery in this
country."

He laid his spear in rest and went forth with armor on, the champion
of freedom. He claimed she should walk the world everywhere,
untrammeled and free to bless the lowest as well as the highest. It
was not right and never could be made right, to forbid working
lawfully that all men might be free. Slavery debased--freedom lifted
up. Slavery corrupted, freedom purified. Freedom might be abused, but
slavery was itself a colossal abuse.

He was no dreaming visionary, but stated with commanding clearness
the doctrine of equality before the law, or political equality,
distinguishing it from social equality. In old Independence Hall, in
1861, he said of the Colonies: "I have often enquired of myself what
great principle or idea it was that kept this confederacy so long
together. It was not the mere matter of the separation of the
Colonies from the mother land, but the sentiment in the Declaration
of Independence which gave liberty, not alone to the people of this
country, but I hope to the world for all future time. It was that
which gave promise that in due time the weight should be lifted from
the shoulders of all men." He held that instrument to teach that
"nothing stamped with the Divine image and likeness was sent into the
world to be trodden on, degraded and imbruted by its fellows."

We search vainly for a clearer and terser statement of the true
theory of equality than he gave last autumn in an address to a
Western regiment. "We have, as all will agree, a free government,
where _every man has a right to be equal with every other man_." Has
a _right to be!_ Take the fetters from his limbs, take the load of
disability from his shoulders, give him room in the arena, and then
if he cannot succeed with others, the failure is his. _But he has the
right_ TO TRY. You have no right to forbid the trial. If he will try
for wealth, fame, political position, he has the right. Let him
exercise it and enjoy what he lawfully wins.

With such views he came to the presidency. Here he was an executive
officer, bound by the Constitution, and charged with its maintenance
and defense. He was to take the nation as the people placed it in his
hands, rule it under the Constitution and surrender it unbroken to
his successor. Accordingly he made to the Southern States all
conceivable propositions for peace. Slavery should be left without
federal interference. They madly rejected all. War came. He saw at
the outset that slavery was our bane. It confronted each regiment,
perplexed each commander. It was the Southern commisariat, dug
Southern trenches and piled Southern breastworks.

But certain Border States maintained a quasi loyalty and clung to
slavery. They were in sympathy with rebellion, but wore the semblance
of allegiance and with consequential airs assumed to dictate the
policy of the President. He was greatly embarrassed. He made them
every kind and conciliatory offer, but all was refused. Slavery on
the gulf and on the border, in Charleston and in Louisville, was the
same intolerant, incurable enemy of the Union. He struck it at last.
The Proclamation of Emancipation came, followed in due time by the
recommendation that the Constitution be so amended as forever to
render slavery impossible in State or Territory. For these acts, he
was arraigned before the American people on the 8th of last November,
and received their emphatic approval.

In a letter written to a citizen of Kentucky, the President gave an
exposition of his policy so transparent, that I reproduce it in this
place. It is his sufficient explanation and vindication.



Executive Mansion, Washington,
April 4, 1864.

A. G. Hodges, Esq., Frankfort, Ky.


    "My Dear Sir:--You ask me to put in writing the substance of what
I verbally stated the other day, in your presence, to Governor
Bramlette and Senator Dixon. It was about as follows:

    "I am naturally anti-slavery. If slavery is not wrong nothing is
wrong. I cannot remember when I did not so think and feel; and yet I
have never understood that the Presidency conferred upon me an
unrestricted right to act officially in this judgment and feeling. It
was in the oath I took that I would to the best of my ability
preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States. I
could not take the office without taking the oath. Nor was it in my
view that I might take the oath to get power, and break the oath in
using the power. I understood, too, that in ordinary civil
administration this oath even forbade me to practically indulge my
primary abstract judgment on the moral question of slavery. I had
publicly declared this many times and in many ways; and I aver that,
to this day I have done no official act in mere deference to my
abstract judgment and feeling on slavery. I did understand, however,
that my oath to preserve the Constitution to the best of my ability
imposed upon me the duty of preserving, by every indispensable means,
that government, that nation, of which that Constitution was the
organic law. Was it possible to lose the nation, and yet preserve the
Constitution? By general law, life and limb must be protected; yet
often a limb must be amputated to save a life, but a life is never
wisely given to save a limb. I felt that measures, otherwise
unconstitutional, might become lawful by becoming indispensable to
the preservation of the Constitution through the preservation of the
nation. Right or wrong, I assumed this ground, and now avow it. I
could not feel that to the best of my ability I had even tried to
preserve the Constitution, if, to save slavery, or any minor matter,
I should permit the wreck of government, country, and Constitution
altogether. When, early in the war, General Fremont attempted
military emancipation, I forbade it, because I did not then think it
an indispensable necessity. When, a little later, General Cameron,
then Secretary of War, suggested the arming of the blacks, I
objected, because I did not yet think it an indispensable necessity.
When, still later, General Hunter attempted military emancipation, I
forbade it, because I did not yet think the indispensable necessity
had come. When, in March and May and July, 1862, I made earnest and
successive appeals to the Border States to favor compensated
emancipation, I believed the indispensable necessity for military
emancipation and arming the blacks would come, unless averted by that
measure. They declined the proposition; and I was, in my best
judgment, driven to the alternative of either surrendering the Union,
and with it the Constitution, or of laying strong hand upon the
colored element. I chose the latter. In choosing it, I hoped for
greater gain than loss; but of this I was not entirely confident.
More than a year of trial now shows no loss by it in our foreign
relations, none in our home popular sentiment, none in our white
military force--no loss by it anyhow or anywhere. On the contrary, it
shows a gain of quite a hundred and thirty thousand soldiers, seamen,
and laborers. These are palpable facts, about which, as facts, there
can be no caviling. We have the men; and we could not have had them
without the measure.

  "And now let any Union man who complains of the measure test
himself by writing down in one line that he is for subduing the
rebellion by force of arms; and in the next, that he is for taking
three [one?] hundred and thirty thousand men from the Union side, and
placing them where they would be but for the measure he condemns. If
he cannot face his case so stated, it is only because he cannot face
the truth.

  "I add a word which was not in the verbal conversation. In telling
this tale, I attempt no compliment to my own sagacity. I claim not to
have controlled events, but confess plainly that events have
controlled me. Now, at the end of three years' struggle, the nation's
condition is not what either party or any man desired or expected.
God alone can claim it. Whither it is tending seems plain. If God now
wills the removal of a great wrong, and wills also that we of the
North, as well as you of the South, shall pay fairly for our
complicity in that wrong, impartial history will find therein new
causes to attest and revere the justice and goodness of God.

      "Yours truly,

            A. Lincoln."



He struck slavery because slavery had clutched the throat of the
Republic, and one of the twain must die! Mr. Lincoln said, LET IT BE
SLAVERY!

Christianity, declaring the brotherhood of race, redemption and
retribution answered, _So be it!_ The Bible, sealed by slave-codes to
four millions for whom its truths were designed, answered _Amen!_ The
gospel long fettered by the slave-master's will, and instead of an
evangel of freedom made to proclaim a message of bondage, lifted up
its voice in thanksgiving. Marriage, long dishonored, put on its
robes of purity, and its ring of perpetual covenant, and answered
_Amen,_ and from above, God's strong angels and six-winged cherubim,
bending earthward, shouted their response to the edict of the Great
Emancipator!


IV.  The next controlling idea was

  PROFOUND RELIGIOUS DEPENDENCE.

As a public man, he set God before his eyes, and did reverence to
the Most High. It was deeply a touching scene as he stood upon the
platform of the car which was to carry him from his Springfield home,
and tearfully asked his neighbors and old friends that they should
remember him in their prayers. Amid tears and sobs they answered "We
will pray for you." Again and again has he publicly invoked Divine
aid, and asked to be remembered in the prayers of the people. His
second Inaugural seems rather the tender pastoral of a white-haired
bishop than a political manifesto.

What were his person relations to his God, I know not. We are not in
all things able to judge him by our personal standard. How much
etiquette may be demanded, how much may have been yielded to the
tyranny of custom we cannot tell. In public life he was spotless in
integrity and dependent upon Divine aid. He had made no public
consecration to God in church covenant, but we may not enter the
sanctuary of his inner life. He constantly read the holy oracles, and
recognized their claim to be the inspired Scriptures.

He felt that religious responsibility when he set forth the
Proclamation of Emancipation closing with the sublime sentence: "And
upon this act, sincerely believed to be an act of justice, warranted
by the Constitution, on military necessity, I invoke the considerable
judgment of mankind and the gracious favor of Almighty God."

In one of the gloomy hours of the struggle he said to a delegation
of clergymen: "My hope of success in this great and terrible struggle
rests on that immutable foundation, the justice and goodness of God.
And when events are very threatening, and prospects very dark, I
still hope, in some way which men cannot see, all will be well in the
end, because our cause is just and God is on our side."

If, as the executive officer of the nation he erred, it was in
excessive tenderness in dealing with criminals. Unsuspecting and
pure, he could not credit unmixed guilt in others, and with
difficulty could he bring himself to suffer condign punishment to be
inflicted. There were times when he was inflexible. In vain did
wealth and position plead for Gardner, the slave-captain. As vainly
did they for Beall and Johnson. If he was lenient it was the error of
amiableness.

In reviewing the administration of Abraham Lincoln, we see in him
another of those Providentially called and directed leaders who have
been raised up in great crises. His name stands on the roll with
those of Moses and Joshua, and William of Orange, and Washington. Not
only did Providence raise him up, but it divinely vindicated his
dealings with slavery. As emancipation was honored, did the pillar of
flame light our hosts on to victory!

In the dawning morn of peace and Union has this leader been slain.
When the nation thought it most needed him, has he been basely
butchered! As the ship which had been rocking in the waves and bowing
before the storm was reaching the harbor, a pirate, who sailed with
the passengers, basely stole on deck and shot the pilot at the wheel!

The assassin has been held in abhorrence among all people and in all
ages. Here was a foul plot to destroy at one swoop the President, the
officers eligible to the succession, the Cabinet, the Lieutenant-
General, and no doubt the loyal Governors of the States. That the
scheme was successful only in part, God be praised. Never has an
assassination produced so terrible a shock. For--


    "He had borne his faculties so meek, had been
     So clear in his great office, that his virtues
     Do plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against
     The deep damnation of his taking off."


He fell, and the whole land mourns. Secession smote him in her
impotent death-rage, but the State lives on! The reins which dropped
from his nerveless hand another grasped, and the nation lives. No
revolution comes. No war of rival dynasties! The constitutional
successor is in the chief seat of power, and how much secession has
taken by this new crime remains to be seen.

Fellow-citizens, there are some duties which press upon us in this
hour.


  1.  We must anew commit ourselves to the work of suppressing
rebellion and re-enthroning the majesty of the Union and
Constitution. Mr. Lincoln lived until the nation's flag had waved in
triumph over every important Southern city; until the proud Southern
aristocracy had thrown itself at the feet of its slaves, and with
frantic outcries implored salvation at their hands; had lived to walk
through Richmond, and be hailed by its dusky freedmen as their
deliverer; had lived until he received the report of the surrender of
Lee's grand army, and then he was slain. We must complete the work.
Onward, until it be wrought. We believe it will be soon, but were it
a hundred years it must be accomplished!

  2.  We must complete the destruction of slavery. Added to its long
catalogue of crimes, it has now slain the Lord's Anointed, the man
whom he made strong! Now as THE ETERNAL liveth, it must die! By the
agonies it has caused, by the uncoffined graves it has filled, by the
tears it has wrung from pure women and little children, by our sons
and brothers starved to death in its mined prisons, by our beloved
Chief Magistrate murdered, by all these do we this day swear unto the
LORD that slavery SHALL DIE and that he would save it shall
politically die with it!

  3.  This day, as funeral rites are being said, and sobs are coming
up from a smitten household and bereaved people, before the Lord do
we solemnly demand that justice be done in the land upon evil-doers,
that blood-guiltiness may be taken away, and that men shall not dare
repeat such crimes.


_When treason slew Abraham Lincoln, it slew the pardoning power,_
and by its own act placed authority in the hands of one of sterner
mold and fiery soul--one deeply wronged by its atrocities. Now let it
receive the reward of its own hands! This is the demand of mercy as
well as justice, that after generations may see the expiation of
treason is too costly for its commission. Mercy to the many demands
the punishment of the guilty.

The assassin of the Chief Magistrate must be found. Though all seas
must be crossed, all mountains ascended, all valleys traversed, he
_must_ be found! If he hide him under the mane of the British lion,
beneath the paw of the Russian bear or among the lilies of France, he
must be found and plucked thence for punishment! If there be no
extradition treaty, then the strong hands of our power must make one.
He was a tragedian. Had he never read--


    "If the assassination
     Could trammel up the consequences and catch
     With this surcease, success; that but this blow
     Might be the be-all and the end-all _here,_

    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    "We'd jump the life to come.  But in these cases
     _We still have judgment here._  We but teach
     Bloody inventions, which, being taught, return
     To plague the inventors.  Thus even-handed justice
     Commends the ingredients of our poisoned chalice
     To our own lips."


We are told that he excelled in the part of Richard III. Did he not
remember the tent scene--


    "My conscience hath a thousand several tongues,
     And every tongue brings in a several tale,
     And every tale condemns me for a villain--
     Perjury, perjury, in the highest degree,
     Murder, stern murder, in the darkest degree;
     All several sins, all used in each degree,
     Throng to the bar, crying all--Guilty! guilty!
     I shall despair.  There is no creature loves me;
     And, if I die, no soul will pity me."


He has murdered the Lord's Anointed, and vengeance shall pursue him.
Tell me not, in deprecation of this sentiment "Vengeance is mine, I
will repay saith the Lord." Human justice has its work and must
follow the assassin, if need be, to the very gates of hell! It is
God's edict that he who causelessly takes any human life, "By men
shall his blood be shed"--how much more when it is such a life! [FN#1]


  [FN#1]  Since the MS. of this discourse was given the printer, the
assassin has met his retribution. Hunted like a wild beast to his
lair, he was surrounded by his pursuers, forsaken by his accomplice,
the barn to which he had fled fired, then shot to death, lingering
several hours in intense suffering and his remains consigned to
impenetrable obscurity. Retribution came to him before his victim was
buried. So be it ever! His accomplices are known and _must be_
punished.


A morning journal, which has been somehow retained in the interest
of wrong, of home-traitors, of misrule, has already impliedly put in
the plea of insanity for the assassin. The same journal runs a
parallel between him and John Brown. Well, Virginia executed John
Brown--its own precedent is fatal to its own client!

Let justice be done on the leaders of rebellion. Have done with the
miserable cant of curing those perjured conspirators with kindness.
Libby Prison mined under Federal captives, the starved skeletons of
our slowly murdered kinsmen, the grave of Lincoln, and the gaping
wounds of Seward are your answer. It must be taught men for all time
that treason is, in this life, unpardonable! It is all crimes in one.
In this case it is without the glitter of seeming chivalry for its
relief. It has had nothing knightly. It has conspired to starve
prisoners, has plotted conflagrations which were to consume, in one
dread holocaust, the venerable matron, the gray-haired sire and the
mother with her babe; has resorted to poison, the knife of the cut-
throat and the pistol of the assassin. No treason was ever so
repulsively foul, so reekingly corrupt. For its great leaders, the
block and the halter; for its chieftains, military and civic, of the
second class, perpetual banishment with confiscation of their goods,
for all who have volunteered to fight against the Union perpetual
disfranchisement--these are the demands of a long-suffering people.

The case of treason-sympathizers among us is one of grave moment. It
is hard to bear their sneers and patiently to listen to their covert
treason. It is a question whether the limit of toleration has not
been passed. The era of assassination has been commenced. Be sure
that any man who will excuse an assassin, will himself do foul murder
when he can shoot from behind a hedge, or strike a victim in the
back. It is matter of self-defence to cast such from our midst. Let
us have no violence, no lawlessness, _but such persons must be
persuaded to depart from us._ "They are gentlemen." Booth was courtly
in speech and mien. Have they been State officers? So was Walsh,
whose house was a disunion arsenal. The time has come when we cannot
permit men in sympathy with armed rebellion, which employs the
assassin, to dwell in our midst.

Abraham Lincoln is no more. His work is done. We may not comprehend
the mystery which permitted his removal at such an hour, in such a
way. God hideth himself wondrously, and sometimes seems to stand afar
from His truth and His cause when most needed.

Our leader is gone. His work is finished, and it may be that his
Providential mission was fully accomplished. His memory is
imperishably fragrant. WASHINGTON--LINCOLN! Who shall say which name
shall shine brighter in the firmament of the historic future!

He is dead! In the Presidential Mansion are being said words of
solemn admonition and godly counsel. In a few hours his remains will
be on their way to sleep in their Illinois grave!

Dead! "How is the strong staff broken and the beautiful rod!"

Pray devoutly for the smitten widow and fatherless children of our
Chief Magistrate. They are sorely stricken and God alone can heal
them. To them it is not the loss of the Chief Magistrate that makes
this hour so sad, but that they have no more a husband or a father!

And now that there has been sorrow in all the land, and the death-
angel in all its homes, from the humblest to the highest, is not our
expiation well-nigh wrought, and will not our Father have compassion
upon us?

Let us devoutly pray the King of nations to guide _our nation_
through its remaining struggle! It may be He means to show us that He
alone is the Savior!

Let us implore Divine guidance upon Mr. Lincoln's successor, Andrew
Johnson, President of the United States. He was faithful amid the
faithless. He was true to the Union when few in his section had for
it aught but curses. Pray for him. He comes to power at a critical
time and needs wisdom from above. Confide in him. He will surely rise
above the one error which temporarily drew him down. He is only hated
by traitors, and when they hate, it is safe for loyal men to trust.

By and by we may understand all this. Now it passes comprehension,
but we have seen so many manifestations of God's supervising agency
when we least looked for it, that we may safely trust Him. He means
to save us. Nay, blessed be His name, He _has_ saved us!

His grand purposes will go forward. The wrath of man shall praise
Him, and the remainder of wrath will He restrain. Remember, and take
heart as you remember, the ringing line of Whittier.


    "God's errands never fail."


He who rides upon the whirlwind and directs the storm, is neither
dead nor sleeping, and He is a God who never compromises with wrong,
and never abdicates His throne.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ABRAHAM LINCOLN ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Cast Adrift
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Cast Adrift

Author: T. S. Arthur


        
Release date: October 1, 2003 [eBook #4592]
                Most recently updated: March 14, 2018

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/4592

Credits: Produced by Charles Aldarondo, and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAST ADRIFT ***




Produced by Charles Aldarondo





CAST ADRIFT

By T. S. Arthur

Author Of “Three Years In A Man-Trap,” “Orange Blossoms,” Etc., Etc.


     Philadelphia:
     Cincinnati:
     New York:
     Boston:
     Chicago, Ills.:
     New Castle, Pa.:
     San Francisco, Cal.:

1873



TO THE READER.

IN this romance of real life, in which the truth is stranger than the
fiction, I have lifted only in part the veil that hides the victims of
intemperance and other terrible vices--after they have fallen to the
lower deeps of degradation to be found in our large cities, where the
vile and degraded herd together more like wild beasts than men and
women--and told the story of sorrow, suffering, crime and debasement
as they really exist in Christian America with all the earnestness and
power that in me lies.

Strange and sad and terrible as are some of the scenes from which I hare
drawn this veil, I have not told the half of what exists. My book, apart
from the thread of fiction that runs through its pages, is but a series
of photographs from real life, and is less a work of the imagination
than a record of facts.

If it stirs the hearts of American readers profoundly, and so awakens
the people to a sense of their duty; if it helps to inaugurate more
earnest and radical modes of reform for a state of society of which a
distinguished author has said, “There is not a country throughout the
earth on which it would not bring a curse; there is no religion upon the
earth that it would not deny; there is no people upon the earth it would
not put to shame;”--then will not my work be in vain.

Sitting in our comfortable homes with well-fed, well-clothed and
happy-hearted children about us--children who have our tenderest care,
whose cry of pain from a pin-prick or a fall on the carpeted floor hurts
us like a blow---how few of us know or care anything about the homes
in which some other children dwell, or of the hard and cruel battle for
life they are doomed to fight from the very beginning!

To get out from these comfortable homes and from the midst of tenderly
cared-for little ones, and stand face to face with squalor and hunger,
with suffering, debasement and crime, to look upon the starved faces
of children and hear their helpless cries, is what scarcely one in a
thousand will do. It is too much for our sensibilities. And so we stand
aloof, and the sorrow, and suffering, the debasement, the wrong and
the crime, go on, and because we heed it not we vainly imagine that no
responsibility lies at our door; and yet there is no man or woman who is
not, according to the measure of his or her influence, responsible for
the human debasement and suffering I have portrayed.

The task I set for myself has not been a pleasant one. It has hurt my
sensibilities and sickened my heart many times as I stood face to face
with the sad and awful degradation that exists in certain regions of
our larger cities; and now that my work is done, I take a deep breath
of relief. The result is in your hands, good citizen, Christian reader,
earnest philanthropist! If it stirs your heart in the reading as it
stirred mine in the writing, it will not die fruitless.

THE AUTHOR.



CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I. The unwelcome babe--The defrauded young mother--The struggle
between life and death--“Your baby is in heaven”--A brief retrospect--A
marriage for social position--An ambitious wife and a disappointed
husband--The young daughter--The matrimonial market--The Circassian
slaves of modern society--The highest bidder--Disappearance--The old sad
story--Secret marriage--The letters--Disappointed ambition--Interview
between the parents--The mother's purpose--“Baffled, but not
defeated”--The father's surprise--The returned daughter--Forgiven--“I am
not going away again, father dear”--Insecurity and distrust

CHAPTER II. The hatred of a bad woman--Mrs. Dinneford's plans for the
destruction of Granger--Starting in business--Plots of Mrs. Dinneford
and Freeling--The discounted notes--The trap--Granger's suspicions
aroused--Forgery--Mrs. Dinneford relentless--The arrest--Fresh evidence
of crime upon Granger's person--The shock to Edith--“That night her baby
was born”

CHAPTER III. “It is a splendid boy”--A convenient, non-interfering
family doctor--Cast adrift--Into the world in a basket, unnamed
and disowned--Edith's second struggle back to life--Her mind a
blank--Granger convicted of forgery--Seeks to gain knowledge of his
child--The doctor's evasion and ignorance--An insane asylum instead of
State's prison--Edith's slow return to intelligence--“There's something
I can't understand, mother”--“Where is my baby?”--“What of George?”--No
longer a child, but a broken hearted woman--The divorce

CHAPTER IV. Sympathy between father and daughter--Interest in public
charities--A dreadful sight--A sick babe in the arms of a half-drunken
woman--“Is there no law to meet such cases?”---“The poor baby has no
vote!”--Edith seeks for the grave of her child, but cannot find
it--She questions her mother, who baffles her curiosity--Mrs. Bray's
visit--Interview between Mrs. Dinneford and Mrs. Bray--“The baby
isn't living?”--“Yes; I saw it day before yesterday in the arms of a
beggar-woman”--Edith's suspicions aroused--Determined to discover the
fate of her child--Visits the doctor--“Your baby is in heaven”--“Would
to God it were so, for I saw a baby in hell not long ago!”

CHAPTER V. Mrs. Dinneford visits Mrs. Bray--“The woman to whom you
gave that baby was here yesterday”--The woman must be put out of the
way--Exit Mrs. Dinneford, enter Pinky Swett--“You know your fate--New
Orleans and the yellow fever”--“All I want of you is to keep track of
the baby”--Division of the spoils--Lucky dreams--Consultation of the
dream-book for lucky figures--Sam McFaddon and his backer, who “drives
in the Park and wears a two thousand dollar diamond pin”--The fate of a
baby begged with--The baby must not die--The lottery-policies

CHAPTER VI. Rottenness at the heart of a great city--Pinky Swett's
attempted rescue of a child from cruel beating--The fight--Pinky's
arrest--Appearance of the “queen”--Pinky's release at her command--The
queen's home--The screams of children being beaten--The rescue of
“Flanagan's Nell”--Death the great rescuer--“They don't look after
things in here as they do outside--Everybody's got the screws on, and
things must break sometimes, but it isn't called murder--The coroner
understands it all”

CHAPTER VII. Pinky Swett at the mercy of the crowd in the street--Taken
to the nearest station-house--Mrs. Dinneford visits Mrs. Bray
again--Fresh alarms--“She's got you in her power”---“Money is of no
account”--The knock at the door--Mrs. Dinneford in hiding--The visitor
gone--Mrs. Bray reports the woman insatiable in her demands--Must have
two hundred dollars by sundown--No way of escape except through police
interference--“People who deal with the devil generally have the devil
to pay”--Suspicion--A mistake--Sound of feet upon the stairs--Mrs.
Dinneford again in hiding--Enter Pinky Swett--Pinky disposed of--Mrs.
Dinneford again released--Mrs. Bray's strategy--“Let us be friends
still, Mrs. Bray”--Mrs. Dinneford's deprecation and humiliation--Mrs.
Bray's triumph

CHAPTER VIII. Mrs. Bray receives a package containing two hundred
dollars--“Poor baby! I must see better to its comfort”--Pinky meets a
young girl from the country--The “Ladies' Restaurant”--Fried oysters
and sangaree--The “bindery” girl--“My head feels strangely”--Through
the back alley--The ten-cent lodging house--Robbery--A second robbery--A
veil drawn--A wild prolonged cry of a woman--The policeman listens only
for a moment, and then passes on--Foul play--“In all our large
cities are savages more cruel and brutal in their instincts than the
Comanches”--Who is responsible?

CHAPTER IX. Valuation of the spoils--The receiver--The “policy-shop” and
its customers--A victim of the lottery mania

CHAPTER X. “Policy-drunkards”--A newly-appointed policeman's
blunder--The end of a “policy-drunkard”--Pinky and her friend in
consultation over “a cast-off baby in Dirty alley”--“If you can't get
hush-money out of its mother, you can bleed Fanny Bray”--The way to
starve a baby--Pinky moves her quarters without the use of “a dozen
furniture cars”--A baby's home--The baby's night nurse--The baby's
supper--The baby's bed--How the baby's money is spent--Where the baby's
nurse passes the night--The baby's disappearance

CHAPTER XI. Reserve between mother and daughter--Mrs. Dinneford
disapproves of Edith's charitable visits--Mrs. Dinneford meets Freeling
by appointment at a hotel--“There's trouble brewing”--“A letter from
George Granger”--Accused of conspiracy--Possibility of Granger's pardon
by the governor--An ugly business--In great peril--Freeling's threats of
exposure--A hint of an alternative

CHAPTER XII. Mr. Freeling fails to appear at his place of
business--Examination of his bank accounts--It is discovered that he has
borrowed largely of his friends--Mrs. Dinneford has supplied him $20,000
from her private purse--Mrs. Dinneford falls sick, and temporarily
loses her reason--“I told you her name was Gray--Gray, not Bray”--Half
disclosures--Recovery--Mother and daughter mutually suspicious--The
visitor--Mrs. Dinneford equal to the emergency--Edith thrown off the
track

CHAPTER XIII. Edith is satisfied that her babe is alive--She has a
desire to teach the children of the poor--“My baby may become like one
of these”--She hears of a baby which has been stolen--Resolves to go
and see it, and to apply to Mr. Paulding of the Briar street mission for
assistance in her attempt--Mr. Paulding persuades her that it is best
not to see the child, and promises that he himself will look after
it--Returns home--Her father remonstrates with her, finally promises to
help her

CHAPTER XIV. Mr. Dinneford sets out for the mission-house--An incident
on the way--Encounters Mr. Paulding--Mr. Paulding makes his report--“The
vicious mark their offspring with unmistakable signs of moral depravity;
this baby has signs of a better origin”--A profitable conversation--“I
think you had better act promptly”

CHAPTER XV. Mr. Dinneford with a policeman goes in quest of the
baby--The baby is gone--Inquiries--Mr. Dinneford resolves to
persevere--Cause of the baby's disappearance--Pinky Swett's
curiosity--Change of baby's nurse--Baby's improved condition--Baby's
first experience of motherly tenderness--Baby's first smile--“Such
beautiful eyes”--Pinky Swett visits the St. John mission-school--Edith
is not there

CHAPTER XVI. Mr. Dinneford's return, and Edith's disappointment--“It
is somebody's baby, and it may be mine”--An unsuspected listener--Mrs.
Dinneford acts promptly--Conference between Mrs. Dinneford and Mrs.
Hoyt, _alias_ Bray--The child must be got out of the way--“If it will
not starve, it must drown”--Mrs. Dinneford sees an acquaintance as
she leaves Mrs. Hoyt's, and endeavors to escape his observation--A new
danger and disgrace awaiting her

CHAPTER XVII. Mental conditions of mother and daughter--Mr. Dinneford
aroused to a sense of his moral responsibilities--The heathen in
our midst--The united evil of policy-lotteries and whisky-shops--The
education of the policy-shops

CHAPTER XVIII. News item: “A child drowned”--Another news item: Pinky
Swett sentenced to prison for robbery--Baby's improved
condition--Mrs. Burke's efforts to retain the baby after Pinky Swett's
imprisonment--Baby Andy's rough life in the street--Mrs. Burke's
death--Cast upon the world--Andy's adventures--He finds a home and a
friend

CHAPTER XIX. Mr. Dinneford visits the mission-school--A comparison of
the present with the past--The first mission-school--Reminiscences of
the school in its early days--The zealous scholar--Good effects of
the mission--“Get the burning brands apart, or interpose incombustible
things between them”--An illustration--“Let in light, and the darkness
flees”

CHAPTER XX. “The man awoke and felt the child against his bosom, soft
and warm”--Led by a little child--“God being my helper, I will be a man
again”--A new life--Meeting of an old friend--A friend in need--Food,
clothes, work--A new home--God's strength our only safety

CHAPTER XXI. Intimate relations of physical and moral purity--Blind
Jake--The harvest of the thieves and beggars--Inconsiderate
charity--Beggary a vice--“The deserving poor are never common
beggars”--“To help the evil is to hurt the good” The malignant ulcer
in the body politic of our city--The breeding-places of epidemics and
malignant diseases--Little Italian street musicians--The existence of
slavery in our midst--Facts in regard to it

CHAPTER XXII. Edith's continued interest in the children of the
poor--Christmas dinner at the mission-house--Edith perceives Andy,
and feels a strange attraction toward him--Andy's disappearance after
dinner--Pinky Swett has been seen dragging him away--Lost sight of

CHAPTER XXIII. Christmas dinner at Mr. Dinneford's--The dropped
letter--It is missed--A scene of wild excitement--Mrs. Dinneford's
sudden death--Edith reads the letter--A revelation--“Innocent!”--Edith
is called to her mother--“Dead, and better so!”--Granger's innocence
established--An agony of affection--No longer Granger's wife

CHAPTER XXIV. Edith's sickness--Meeting of Mrs. Bray and Pinky Swett--A
trial of sharpness, in which neither gains the advantage--Mr. Dinneford
receives a call from a lady--The lady, who is Mrs. Bray, offers
information--Mr. Dinneford surprises her into admitting an important
fact--Mrs. Bray offers to produce the child for a price--Mr. Dinneford
consents to pay the price on certain stipulations--Mrs. Bray departs,
promising to come again

CHAPTER XXV. Granger's pardon procured--How he receives his pardon--Mrs.
Bray tries to trace Pinky home--Loses sight of her in the street--Mrs.
Bray interviews a shop-woman--Pinky's destination--The child is gone

CHAPTER XXVI. Mrs. Bray does not call on Mr. Dinneford, as she
promised--Peril to Andrew Hall through loss of the child--Help--Edith
longs to see or write to Granger, but does not--Edith encounters Mrs.
Bray in the street--“Where is my baby?”--Disappointment--How to identify
the child if found

CHAPTER XXVII. No trace of Andy--Account of Andy's abduction--Andy's
prison--An outlook from prison--A loose nail--The escape--The sprained
ankle--The accident

CHAPTER XXVIII. Edith's visit to the children's hospital--“Oh, my baby!
thank God! my baby!”--The identification

CHAPTER XXIX. Meeting of Mr. Dinneford and George Granger--“We want you
to help us find your child”--“Edith's heart is calling out for you”--The
meeting--The marriage benediction





CAST ADRIFT.



CHAPTER I.



_A BABY_ had come, but he was not welcome. Could anything be sadder?

The young mother lay with her white face to the wall, still as death. A
woman opened the chamber door noiselessly and came in, the faint rustle
of her garments disturbing the quiet air.

A quick, eager turning of the head, a look half anxious, half fearful,
and then the almost breathless question,

“Where is my baby?”

“Never mind about the baby,” was answered, almost coldly; “he's well
enough. I'm more concerned about you.”

“Have you sent word to George?”

“George can't see you. I've said that before.”

“Oh, mother! I must see my husband.”

“Husband!” The tone of bitter contempt with which the word was uttered
struck the daughter like a blow. She had partly risen in her excitement,
but now fell back with a low moan, shutting her eyes and turning her
face away. Even as she did so, a young man stepped back from the door of
the elegant house in which she lay with a baffled, disappointed air. He
looked pale and wretched.

“Edith!” Two hours afterward the doctor stood over the young mother,
and called her name. She did not move nor reply. He laid his hand on her
cheek, and almost started, then bent down and looked at her intently for
a moment or two. She had fever. A serious expression came into his face,
and there was cause.

The sweet rest and heavenly joy of maternity had been denied to his
young patient. The new-born babe had not been suffered to lie even for
one blissful moment on her bosom. Hard-hearted family pride and cruel
worldliness had robbed her of the delight with which God ever seeks to
dower young motherhood, and now the overtaxed body and brain had given
way.

For many weeks the frail young creature struggled with
delirium--struggled and overcame.

“Where is my baby?”

The first thought of returning consciousness was of her baby.

A woman who sat in a distant part of the chamber started up and crossed
to the bed. She was past middle life, of medium stature, with small,
clearly cut features and cold blue eyes. Her mouth was full, but very
firm. Self-poise was visible even in her surprised movements. She bent
over the bed and looked into Edith's wistful eyes.

“Where is my baby, mother?” Mrs. Dinneford put her fingers lightly on
Edith's lips.

“You must be very quiet,” she said, in a low, even voice. “The doctor
forbids all excitement. You have been extremely ill.”

“Can't I see my baby, mother? It won't hurt me to see my baby.”

“Not now. The doctor--”

Edith half arose in bed, a look of doubt and fear coming into her face.

“I want my baby, mother,” she said, interrupting her.

A hard, resolute expression came into the cold blue eyes of Mrs.
Dinneford. She put her hand firmly against Edith and pressed her back
upon the pillow.

“You have been very ill for nearly two months,” she said, softening her
voice. “No one thought you could live. Thank God! the crisis is over,
but not the danger.”

“Two months! Oh, mother!”

The slight flush that had come into Edith's wan face faded out, and the
pallor it had hidden for a few moments became deeper. She shut her eyes
and lay very still, but it was plain from the expression of her face
that thought was busy.

“Not two whole months, mother?” she said, at length, in doubtful tones.
“Oh no! it cannot be.”

“It is just as I have said, Edith; and now, my dear child, as you value
your life, keep quiet; all excitement is dangerous.”

But repression was impossible. To Edith's consciousness there was no
lapse of time. It seemed scarcely an hour since the birth of her baby
and its removal from her sight. The inflowing tide of mother-love, the
pressure and yearning sweetness of which she had begun to feel when she
first called for the baby they had not permitted to rest, even for an
instant, on her bosom, was now flooding her heart. Two months! If that
were so, what of the baby? To be submissive was impossible.

Starting up half wildly, a vague terror in her face, she cried,
piteously,

“Oh, mother, bring me my baby. I shall die if you do not!”

“Your baby is in heaven,” said Mrs. Dinneford, softening her voice to a
tone of tender regret.

Edith caught her breath, grew very white, and then, with a low, wailing
cry that sent a shiver through Mrs. Dinneford's heart, fell back, to all
appearance dead.

The mother did not call for help, but sat by the bedside of her
daughter, and waited for the issue of this new struggle between life and
death. There was no visible excitement, but her mouth was closely set
and her cold blue eyes fixed in a kind of vacant stare.

Edith was Mrs. Dinneford's only child, and she had loved her with
the strong, selfish love of a worldly and ambitious woman. In her
own marriage she had not consulted her heart. Mr. Dinneford's social
position and wealth were to her far more than his personal endowments.
She would have rejected him without a quicker pulse-beat if these had
been all he had to offer. He was disappointed, she was not. Strong,
self-asserting, yet politic, Mrs Dinneford managed her good husband
about as she pleased in all external matters, and left him to the free
enjoyment of his personal tastes, preferences and friendships. The
house they lived in, the furniture it contained, the style and equipage
assumed by the family, were all of her choice, Mr. Dinneford giving
merely a half-constrained or half-indifferent consent. He had learned,
by painful and sometimes humiliating experience, that any contest with
Mrs. Helen Dinneford upon which he might enter was sure to end in his
defeat.

He was a man of fine moral and intellectual qualities. His wealth gave
him leisure, and his tastes, feelings and habits of thought drew
him into the society of some of the best men in the city where he
lived--best in the true meaning of that word. In all enlightened social
reform movements you would be sure of finding Mr. Howard Dinneford. He
was an active and efficient member in many boards of public charity, and
highly esteemed in them all for his enlightened philanthropy and sound
judgment. Everywhere but at home he was strong and influential; there he
was weak, submissive and of little account. He had long ago accepted
the situation, making a virtue of necessity. A different man--one of
stronger will and a more imperious spirit--would have held his own, even
though it wrought bitterness and sorrow. But Mr. Dinneford's aversion
to strife, and gentleness toward every one, held him away from conflict,
and so his home was at least tranquil.

Mrs. Dinneford had her own way, and so long as her husband made no
strong opposition to that way all was peaceful.

For Edith, their only child, who was more like her father than her
mother, Mr. Dinneford had the tenderest regard. The well-springs of
love, choked up so soon after his marriage, were opened freely toward
his daughter, and he lived in her a new, sweet and satisfying life. The
mother was often jealous of her husband's demonstrative tenderness for
Edith. A yearning instinct of womanhood, long repressed by worldliness
and a mean social ambition, made her crave at times the love she had
cast away, and then her cup of life was very bitter. But fear of Mr.
Dinneford's influence over Edith was stronger than any jealousy of his
love. She had high views for her daughter. In her own marriage she had
set aside all considerations but those of social rank. She had made it
a stepping-stone to a higher place in society than the one to which she
was born. Still, above them stood many millionaire families, living
in palace-homes, and through her daughter she meant to rise into one
of them. It mattered not for the personal quality of the scion of the
house; he might be as coarse and common as his father before him, or
weak, mean, selfish, and debased by sensual indulgence. This was of
little account. To lift Edith to the higher social level was the all in
all of Mrs. Dinneford's ambition.

But Mr. Dinneford taught Edith a nobler life-lesson than this, gave her
better views of wedlock, pictured for her loving heart the bliss of a
true marriage, sighing often as he did so, but unconsciously, at the
lost fruition of his own sweet hopes. He was careful to do this only
when alone with Edith, guarding his speech when Mrs. Dinneford was
present. He had faith in true principles, and with these he sought to
guard her life. He knew that she would be pushed forward into society,
and knew but too well that one so pure and lovely in mind as well as
person would become a centre of attraction, and that he, standing on the
outside as it were, would have no power to save her from the saddest of
all fates if she were passive and her mother resolute. Her safety must
lie in herself.

Edith was brought out early. Mrs. Dinneford could not wait. At seventeen
she was thrust into society, set up for sale to the highest bidder, her
condition nearer that of a Circassian than a Christian maiden, with her
mother as slave-dealer.

So it was and so, it is. You may see the thing every day. But it did not
come out according to Mrs. Dinneford's programme. There was a highest
bidder; but when he came for his slave, she was not to be found.

Well, the story is trite and brief--the old sad story. Among her suitors
was a young man named Granger, and to him Edith gave her heart. But
the mother rejected him with anger and scorn. He was not rich, though
belonging to a family of high character, and so fell far below her
requirements. Under a pressure that almost drove the girl to despair,
she gave her consent to a marriage that looked more terrible than death.
A month before the time fixed for, its consummation, she barred the
contract by a secret union with Granger.

Edith knew her mother's character too well to hope for any
reconciliation, so far as Mr. Granger was concerned. Coming in as he had
done between her and the consummation of her highest ambition, she could
never feel toward him anything but the most bitter hatred; and so, after
remaining at home for about a week after her secret marriage, she wrote
this brief letter to her mother and went away:

“My DEAR MOTHER: I do not love Spencer Wray, and would rather die than
marry him, and so I have made the marriage to which my heart has never
consented, an impossibility. You have left me no other alternative but
this. I am the wife of George Granger, and go to cast my lot with his.

“Your loving daughter,

“EDITH.”

To her father she wrote:

“My DEAR, DEAR FATHER: If I bring sorrow to your good and loving heart
by what I have done, I know that it will be tempered with joy at my
escape from a union with one from whom my soul has ever turned with
irrepressible dislike. Oh, my father, you can understand, if mother
cannot, into what a desperate strait I have been brought. I am a deer
hunted to the edge of a dizzy chasm, and I leap for life over the dark
abyss, praying for strength to reach the farther edge. If I fail in the
wild effort, I can only meet destruction; and I would rather be bruised
to death on the jagged rocks than trust myself to the hounds and
hunters. I write passionately--you will hardly recognize your quiet
child; but the repressed instincts of my nature are strong, and peril
and despair have broken their bonds. I did not consult you about the
step I have taken, because I dared not trust you with my secret. You
would have tried to hold me back from the perilous leap, fondly hoping
for some other way of escape. I had resolved on putting an impassable
gulf between me and danger, if I died in the attempt. I have taken the
leap, and may God care for me!

“I have laid up in my heart of hearts, dearest of fathers, the precious
life-truths that so often fell from your lips. Not a word that you ever
said about the sacredness of marriage has been forgotten. I believe
with you that it is a little less than crime to marry when no love
exists--that she who does so, sells her heart's birthright for some
mess of pottage, sinks down from the pure level of noble womanhood, and
traffics away her person, is henceforth meaner in quality if not really
vile.

“And so, my father, to save myself from such a depth of degradation and
misery, I take my destiny into my own hands. I have grown very strong in
my convictions and purposes in the last four weeks. My sight has become
suddenly clear. I am older by many years.

“As for George Granger, all I can now say is that I love him, and
believe him to be worthy of my love. I am willing to trust him, and am
ready to share his lot, however humble.

“Still hold me in your heart, my precious father, as I hold you in mine.

“EDITH.”

Mr. Dinneford read this letter twice. It took him some time, his eyes
were so full of tears. In view of her approaching marriage with Spencer
Wray, his heart had felt very heavy. It was something lighter now. Young
Granger was not the man he would have chosen for Edith, but he liked him
far better than he did the other, and felt that his child was safe now.

He went to his wife's room, and found her with Edith's letter crushed in
her hand. She was sitting motionless, her face pale and rigid, her eyes
fixed and stony and her lips tight against her teeth. She did not seem
to notice his presence until he put his hand upon her, which he did
without speaking. At this she started up and looked at him with a kind
of fierce intentness.

“Are you a party to this frightful things?” she demanded.

Mr. Dinneford weakly handed her the letter he had received from Edith.
She read it through in half the time it had taken his tear-dimmed eyes
to make out the touching sentences. After she had done so, she stood for
a few moments as if surprised or baffled. Then she sat down, dropping
her head, and remained for a long time without speaking.

“The bitter fruit, Mr. Dinneford,” she said, at last, in a voice so
strange and hard that it seemed to his ears as if another had spoken.
All passion had died out of it.

He waited, but she added nothing more. After a long silence she waved
her hand slightly, and without looking at her husband, said,

“I would rather be alone.”

Mr. Dinneford took Edith's letter from the floor, where it had dropped
from his wife's hand, and withdrew from her presence. She arose quickly
as he did so, crossed the room and silently turned the key, locking
herself in. Then her manner changed; she moved about the room in a
half-aimless, half-conscious way, as though some purpose was beginning
to take shape in her mind. Her motions had an easy, cat-like grace, in
contrast with their immobility a little while before. Gradually her step
became quicker, while ripples of feeling began to pass over her face,
which was fast losing its pallor. Gleams of light began shooting from
her eyes, that were so dull and stony when her husband found her with
Edith's letter crushed in her grasp. Her hands opened and shut upon
themselves nervously. This went on, the excitement of her forming
purpose, whatever it was, steadily increasing, until she swept about
the room like a fury, talking to herself and gesticulating as one half
insane from the impelling force of an evil passion.

“Baffled, but not defeated.” The excitement had died out. She spoke
these words aloud, and with a bitter satisfaction in her voice, then sat
down, resting her face in her hands, and remaining for a long time in
deep thought.

When she met her husband, an hour afterward, there was a veil over her
face, and he tried in vain to look beneath it. She was greatly changed;
her countenance had a new expression--something he had never seen there
before. For years she had been growing away from him; now she seemed
like one removed to a great distance--to have become almost stranger. He
felt half afraid of her. She did not speak of Edith, but remained cold,
silent and absorbed.

Mrs. Dinneford gave no sign of what was in her heart for many weeks.
The feeling of distance and strangeness perceived by her husband went on
increasing, until a vague feeling of mystery and fear began to oppress
him. Several times he had spoken of Edith, but his wife made no
response, nor could he read in her veiled face the secret purposes she
was hiding from him.

No wonder that Mr. Dinneford was greatly surprised and overjoyed, on
coming home one day, to meet his daughter, to feel her arms about his
neck, and to hold her tearful face on his bosom.

“And I'm not going away again, father dear,” she said as she kissed him
fondly. “Mother has sent for me, and George is to come. Oh, we shall be
so happy, so happy!”

And father and daughter cried together, like two happy children, in very
excess of gladness. They had met alone, but Mrs. Dinneford came in, her
presence falling on them like a cold shadow.

“Two great babies,” she said, a covert sneer in her chilling voice.

The joy went slowly out of their faces, though not out of their
hearts. There it nestled, and warmed the renewing blood. But a vague,
questioning fear began to creep in, a sense of insecurity, a dread of
hidden danger. The daughter did not fully trust her mother, nor the
husband his wife.




CHAPTER II.



_THE_ reception of young Granger was as cordial as Mrs. Dinneford
chose to make it. She wanted to get near enough to study his character
thoroughly, to discover its weaknesses and defects, not its better
qualities, so that she might do for him the evil work that was in her
heart. She hated him with a bitter hatred, and there is nothing so
subtle and tireless and unrelenting as the hatred of a bad woman.

She found him weak and unwary. His kindly nature, his high sense of
honor, his upright purpose, his loving devotion to Edith, were nothing
in her eyes. She spurned them in her thoughts, she trampled them under
her feet with scorn. But she studied his defects, and soon knew every
weak point in his character. She drew him out to speak of himself,
of his aims and prospects, of his friends and associates, until she
understood him altogether. Then she laid her plans for his destruction.

Granger was holding a clerkship at the time of his marriage, but was
anxious to get a start for himself. He had some acquaintance with a
man named Lloyd Freeling, and often spoke of him in connection with
business. Freeling had a store on one of the best streets, and, as
represented by himself, a fine run of trade, but wanted more capital.
One day he said to Granger,

“If I could find the right man with ten thousand dollars, I would take
him in. We could double this business in a year.”

Granger repeated the remark at home, Mrs. Dinneford listened, laid it up
in her thought, and on the next day called at the store of Mr. Freeling
to see what manner of man he was.

Her first impression was favorable--she liked him. On a second visit she
likes him better. She was not aware that Freeling knew her; in this he
had something of the advantage. A third time she dropped in, asking to
see certain goods and buying a small bill, as before. This time she drew
Mr. Freeling into conversation about business, and put some questions
the meaning of which he understood quite as well as she did.

A woman like Mrs. Dinneford can read character almost as easily as she
can read a printed page, particularly a weak or bad character. She knew
perfectly, before the close of this brief interview, that Freeling was a
man without principle, false and unscrupulous, and that if Granger were
associated with him in business, he could, if he chose, not only involve
him in transactions of a dishonest nature, but throw upon him the odium
and the consequences.

“Do you think,” she said to Granger, not long afterward, “that your
friend, Mr. Freeling, would like to have you for a partner in business?”

The question surprised and excited him.

“I know it,” he returned; “he has said so more than once.”

“How much capital would he require?”

“Ten thousand dollars.”

“A large sum to risk.”

“Yes; but I do not think there will be any risk. The business is well
established.”

“What do you know about Mr. Freeling?”

“Not a great deal; but if I am any judge of character, he is fair and
honorable.”

Mrs. Dinneford turned her head that Granger might not see the expression
of her face.

“You had better talk with Mr. Dinneford,” she said.

But Mr. Dinneford did not favor it. He had seen too many young men go
into business and fail.

So the matter was dropped for a little while. But Mrs. Dinneford had
set her heart on the young man's destruction, and no better way of
accomplishing the work presented itself than this. He must be involved
in some way to hurt his good name, to blast his reputation and drive him
to ruin. Weak, trusting and pliable, a specious villain in whom he
had confidence might easily get him involved in transactions that were
criminal under the law. She would be willing to sacrifice twice ten
thousand dollars to accomplish this result.

Neither Mr. Dinneford nor Edith favored the business connection with
Freeling, and said all they could against it. In weak natures we often
find great pertinacity. Granger had this quality. He had set his mind on
the copartnership, and saw in it a high road to fortune, and no argument
of Mr. Dinneford, nor opposition of Edith, had power to change his
views, or to hold him back from the arrangement favored by Mrs.
Dinneford, and made possible by the capital she almost compelled her
husband to supply.

In due time the change from clerk to merchant was made, and the new
connection announced, under the title of “FREELING & GRANGER.”

Clear seeing as evil may be in its schemes for hurting others, it
is always blind to the consequent exactions upon itself; it strikes
fiercely and desperately, not calculating the force of a rebound. So
eager was Mrs. Dinneford to compass the ruin of Granger that she stepped
beyond the limit of common prudence, and sought private interviews
with Freeling, both before and after the completion of the partnership
arrangement. These took place in the parlor of a fashionable hotel,
where the gentleman and lady seemed to meet accidentally, and without
attracting attention.

Mrs. Dinneford was very confidential in these interviews not concealing
her aversion to Granger. He had come into the family, she said, as an
unwelcome intruder; but now that he was there, they had to make the best
of him. Not in spoken words did Mrs. Dinneford convey to Freeling the
bitter hatred that was in her heart, nor in spoken words let him know
that she desired the young man's utter ruin, but he understood it
all before the close of their first private interview. Freeling was
exceedingly deferential in the beginning and guarded in his speech. He
knew by the quick intuitions of his nature that Mrs. Dinneford cherished
an evil purpose, and had chosen him as the agent for its accomplishment.
She was rich, and occupied a high social position, and his ready
conclusion was that, be the service what it might, he could make it pay.
To get such a woman in his power was worth an effort.

One morning--it was a few months after the date of the
copartnership--Mrs. Dinneford received a note from Freeling. It said,
briefly,

“At the usual place, 12 M. to-day. Important.” There was no signature.

The sharp knitting of her brows and the nervous crumpling of the note
in her hand showed that she was not pleased at the summons. She had come
already to know her partner in evil too well. At 12 M. she was in
the hotel parlor. Freeling was already there. They met in external
cordiality, but it was very evident from the manner of Mrs. Dinneford,
that she felt herself in the man's power, and had learned to be afraid
of him.

“It will be impossible to get through to-morrow,” he said, in a kind of
imperative voice, that was half a threat, “unless we have two thousand
dollars.”

“I cannot ask Mr. Dinneford for anything more,” Mrs. Dinneford replied;
“we have already furnished ten thousand dollars beyond the original
investment.”

“But it is all safe enough--that is, if we do not break down just here
for lack of so small a sum.”

Mrs. Dinneford gave a start.

“Break down!” She repeated the words in a husky, voice, with a paling
face. “What do you mean?”

“Only that in consequence of having in store a large stock of unsalable
goods bought by your indiscreet son-in-law, who knows no more about
business than a child, we are in a temporary strait.”

“Why did you trust him to buy?” asked Mrs. Dinneford.

“I didn't trust him. He bought without consulting me,” was replied,
almost rudely.

“Will two thousand be the end of this thing?”

“I think so.”

“You only think so?”

“I am sure of it.”

“Very well; I will see what can be done. But all this must have an end,
Mr. Freeling. We cannot supply any more money. You must look elsewhere
if you have further need. Mr. Dinneford is getting very much annoyed and
worried. You surely have other resources.”

“I have drawn to the utmost on all my resources,” said the man, coldly.

Mrs. Dinneford remained silent for a good while, her eyes upon the
floor. Freeling watched her face intently, trying to read what was in
her thoughts. At last she said, in a suggestive tone,

“There are many ways of getting money known to business-men--a little
risky some of them, perhaps, but desperate cases require desperate
expedients. You understand me?”

Freeling took a little time to consider before replying.

“Yes,” he said, at length, speaking slowly, as one careful of his words.
“But all expedients are 'risky,' as you say--some of them very risky. It
takes a long, cool head to manage them safely.”

“I don't know a longer or cooler head than yours,” returned Mrs.
Dinneford, a faint smile playing about her lips.

“Thank you for the compliment,” said Freeling, his lips reflecting the
smile on hers.

“You must think of some expedient.” Mrs. Dinneford's manner grew
impressive. She spoke with emphasis and deliberation. “Beyond the sum of
two thousand dollars, which I will get for you by to-morrow, I shall not
advance a single penny. You may set that down as sure. If you are not
sharp enough and strong enough, with the advantage you possess, to hold
your own, then you must go under; as for me, I have done all that I can
or will.”

Freeling saw that she was wholly in earnest, and understood what she
meant by “desperate expedients.” Granger was to be ruined, and she was
growing impatient of delay. He had no desire to hurt the young man--he
rather liked him. Up to this time he had been content with what he could
draw out of Mrs. Dinneford. There was no risk in this sort of business.
Moreover, he enjoyed his interviews and confidences with the elegant
lady, and of late the power he seemed to be gaining over her; this power
he regarded as capital laid up for another use, and at another time.

But it was plain that he had reached the end of his present financial
policy, and must decide whether to adopt the new one suggested by Mrs.
Dinneford or make a failure, and so get rid of his partner. The question
he had to settle with himself was whether he could make more by a
failure than by using Granger a while longer, and then throwing him
overboard, disgraced and ruined. Selfish and unscrupulous as he was,
Freeling hesitated to do this. And besides, the “desperate expedients”
 he would have to adopt in the new line of policy were fraught with
peril to all who took part in them. He might fall into the snare set for
another--might involve himself so deeply as not to find a way of escape.

“To-morrow we will talk this matter over,” he said in reply to Mrs.
Dinneford's last remark; “in the mean time I will examine the ground
thoroughly and see how it looks.”

“Don't hesitate to make any use you can of Granger,” suggested the lady.
“He has done his part toward getting things tangled, and must help to
untangle them.”

“All right, ma'am.”

And they separated, Mrs. Dinneford reaching the street by one door of
the hotel, and Freeling by another.

On the following day they met again, Mrs. Dinneford bringing the two
thousand dollars.

“And now what next?” she asked, after handing over the money and taking
the receipt of “Freeling & Granger.” Her eyes had a hard glitter, and
her face was almost stern in its expression. “How are you going to raise
money and keep afloat?”

“Only some desperate expedient is left me now,” answered Freeling,
though not in the tone of a man who felt himself at bay. It was said
with a wicked kind of levity.

Mrs. Dinneford looked at him keenly. She was beginning to mistrust the
man. They gazed into each other's faces in silence for some moments,
each trying to read what was in the other's thought. At length Freeling
said,

“There is one thing more that you will have to do, Mrs. Dinneford.”

“What?” she asked.

“Get your husband to draw two or three notes in Mr. Granger's favor.
They should not be for less than five hundred or a thousand dollars
each. The dates must be short--not over thirty or sixty days.”

“It can't be done,” was the emphatic answer.

“It must be done,” replied Freeling; “they need not be for the business.
You can manage the matter if you will; your daughter wants an India
shawl, or a set of diamonds, or a new carriage--anything you choose. Mr.
Dinneford hasn't the ready cash, but we can throw his notes into bank
and get the money; don't you see?”

But Mrs. Dinneford didn't see.

“I don't mean,” said Freeling, “that we are to use the money. Let the
shawl, or the diamond, or the what-not, be bought and paid for. We get
the discounts for your use, not ours.”

“All very well,” answered Mrs. Dinneford; “but how is that going to help
you?”

“Leave that to me. You get the notes,” said Freeling.

“Never walk blindfold, Mr. Freeling,” replied the lady, drawing herself
up, with a dignified air. “We ought to understand each other by this
time. I must see beyond the mere use of these notes.”

Freeling shut his mouth tightly and knit his heavy brows. Mrs. Dinneford
watched him, closely.

“It's a desperate expedient,” he said, at length.

“All well as far as that is concerned; but if I am to have a hand in it,
I must know all about it,” she replied, firmly. “As I said just now, I
never walk blindfold.”

Freeling leaned close to Mrs. Dinneford, and uttered a few sentences in
a low tone, speaking rapidly. The color went and came in her face, but
she sat motionless, and so continued for some time after he had ceased
speaking.

“You will get the notes?” Freeling put the question as one who has
little doubt of the answer.

“I will get them,” replied Mrs. Dinneford.

“When?”

“It will take time.”

“We cannot wait long. If the thing is done at all, it must be done
quickly. 'Strike while the iron is hot' is the best of all maxims.”

“There shall be no needless delay on my part. You may trust me for
that,” was answered.

Within a week Mrs. Dinneford brought two notes, drawn by her husband
in favor of George Granger--one for five hundred and the other for one
thousand dollars. The time was short--thirty and sixty days. On this
occasion she came to the store and asked for her son-in-law. The meeting
between her and Freeling was reserved and formal. She expressed regret
for the trouble she was giving the firm in procuring a discount for her
use, and said that if she could reciprocate the favor in any way she
would be happy to do so.

“The notes are drawn to your order,” remarked Freeling as soon as the
lady had retired. Granger endorsed them, and was about handing them to
his partner, when the latter said:

“Put our name on them while you are about it.” And the young man wrote
also the endorsement of the firm.

After this, Mr. Freeling put the bank business into Granger's hands.
Nearly all checks were drawn and all business paper endorsed by the
younger partner, who became the financier of the concern, and had the
management of all negotiations for money in and out of bank.

One morning, shortly after the first of Mr. Dinneford's notes was paid,
Granger saw his mother-in-law come into the store. Freeling was at the
counter. They talked together for some time, and then Mrs. Dinneford
went out.

On the next day Granger saw Mrs. Dinneford in the store again. After
she had gone away, Freeling came back, and laying a note-of-hand on his
partner's desk, said, in a pleased, confidential way.

“Look at that, my friend.”

Granger read the face of the note with a start of surprise. It was drawn
to his order, for three thousand dollars, and bore the signature of
Howard Dinneford.

“A thing that is worth having is worth asking for,” said Freeling.
“We obliged your mother-in-law, and now she has returned the favor. It
didn't come very easily, she said, and your father-in-law isn't feeling
rather comfortable about it; so she doesn't care about your speaking of
it at home.”

Granger was confounded.

“I can't understand it,” he said.

“You can understand that we have the note, and that it has come in the
nick of time,” returned Freeling.

“Yes, I can see all that.”

“Well, don't look a gift-horse in the mouth, but spring into the saddle
and take a ride. Your mother-in-law is a trump. If she will, she will,
you may depend on't.”

Freeling was unusually excited. Granger looked the note over and over
in a way that seemed to annoy his partner, who said, presently, with a
shade of ill-nature in his voice,

“What's the matter? Isn't the signature all right?”

“That's right enough,” returned the young man, after looking at it
closely. “But I can't understand it.”

“You will when you see the proceeds passed to our accounted in bank--ha!
ha!”

Granger looked up at his partner quickly, the laugh had so strange a
sound, but saw nothing new in his face.

In about a month Freeling had in his possession another note, signed by
Mr. Dinneford and drawn to the order of George Granger. This one was for
five thousand dollars. He handed it to his partner soon after the latter
had observed Mrs. Dinneford in the store.

A little over six weeks from this time Mrs. Dinneford was in the store
again. After she had gone away, Freeling handed Granger three more
notes drawn by Mr. Dinneford to his order, amounting in all to fifteen
thousand dollars. They were at short dates.

Granger took these notes without any remark, and was about putting them
in his desk, when Freeling said,

“I think you had better offer one in the People's Bank and another in
the Fourth National. They discount to-morrow.”

“Our line is full in both of these banks,” replied Granger.

“That may or may not be. Paper like this is not often thrown out. Call
on the president of the Fourth National and the cashier of the People's
Bank. Say that we particularly want the money, and would like them to
see that the notes go through. Star & Giltedge can easily place the
other.”

Granger's manner did not altogether please his partner. The notes lay
before him on his desk, and he looked at them in a kind of dazed way.

“What's the matter?” asked Freeling, rather sharply.

“Nothing,” was the quiet answer.

“You saw Mrs. Dinneford in the store just now. I told her last week that
I should claim another favor at her hands. She tried to beg off, but I
pushed the matter hard. It must end here, she says. Mr. Dinneford won't
go any farther.”

“I should think not,” replied Granger. “I wouldn't if I were he. The
wonder to me is that he has gone so far. What about the renewal of these
notes?”

“Oh, that is all arranged,” returned Freeling, a little hurriedly.
Granger looked at him for some moments. He was not satisfied.

“See that they go in bank,” said Freeling, in a positive way.

Granger took up his pen in an abstracted manner and endorsed the notes,
after which he laid them in his bank-book. An important customer coming
in at the moment, Freeling went forward to see him. After Granger was
left alone, he took the notes from his bank-book and examined them
with great care. Suspicion was aroused. He felt sure that something
was wrong. A good many things in Freeling's conduct of late had seemed
strange. After thinking for a while, he determined to take the notes at
once to Mr. Dinneford and ask him if all was right. As soon as his mind
had reached this conclusion he hurried through the work he had on hand,
and then putting his bank-book in his pocket, left the store.

On that very morning Mr. Dinneford received notice that he had a note
for three thousand dollars falling due at one of the banks. He went
immediately and asked to see the note. When it was shown to him, he was
observed to become very pale, but he left the desk of the note-clerk
without any remark, and returned home. He met his wife at the door, just
coming in.

“What's the matter?” she asked, seeing how pale he was. “Not sick, I
hope?”

“Worse than sick,” he replied as they passed into the house together.
“George has been forging my name.”

“Impossible!” exclaimed Mrs. Dinneford.

“I wish it were,” replied Mr. Dinneford, sadly; “but, alas! it is too
true. I have just returned from the Fourth National Bank. They have a
note for three thousand dollars, bearing my signature. It is drawn
to the order of George Granger, and endorsed by him. The note is a
forgery.”

Mrs. Dinneford became almost wild with excitement. Her fair face grew
purple. Her eyes shone with a fierce light.

“Have you had him arrested?” she asked.

“Oh no, no, no!” Mr. Dinneford answered. “For poor Edith's sake, if for
nothing else, this dreadful business must be kept secret. I will take up
the note when due, and the public need be none the wiser.”

“If,” said Mrs. Dinneford, “he has forged your name once, he has, in all
probability, done it again and again. No, no; the thing can't be hushed
up, and it must not be. Is he less a thief and a robber because he is
our son-in-law? My daughter the wife of a forger! Great heavens! has it
come to this Mr. Dinneford?” she added, after a pause, and with intense
bitterness and rejection in her voice. “The die is cast! Never again, if
I can prevent it, shall that scoundrel cross our threshold. Let the law
have its course. It is a crime to conceal crime.”

“It will kill our poor child!” answered Mr. Dinneford in a broken voice.

“Death is better than the degradation of living with a criminal,”
 replied his wife. “I say it solemnly, and I mean it; the die is cast!
Come what will, George Granger stands now and for ever on the outside!
Go at once and give information to the bank officers. If you do not, I
will.”

With a heavy heart Mr. Dinneford returned to the bank and informed the
president that the note in question was a forgery. He had been gone from
home a little over half an hour, when Granger, who had come to ask him
about the three notes given him that morning by Freeling, put his key in
the door, and found, a little to his surprise, that the latch was down.
He rang the bell, and in a few moments the servant appeared. Granger was
about passing in, when the man said, respectfully but firmly, as he held
the door partly closed,

“My orders are not to let you come in.”

“Who gave you those orders?” demanded Granger, turning white.

“Mrs. Dinneford.”

“I wish to see Mr. Dinneford, and I must see him immediately.”

“Mr. Dinneford is not at home,” answered the servant.

“Shut that door instantly!”

It was the voice of Mrs. Dinneford, speaking from within. Granger heard
it; in the next moment the door was shut in his face.

The young man hardly knew how he got back to the store. On his arrival
he found himself under arrest, charged with forgery, and with fresh
evidence of the crime on his person in the three notes received that
morning from his partner, who denied all knowledge of their existence,
and appeared as a witness against him at the hearing before a
magistrate. Granger was held to bail to answer the charge at the next
term of court.

It would have been impossible to keep all this from Edith, even if there
had been a purpose to do so. Mrs. Dinneford chose to break the dreadful
news at her own time and in her own way. The shock was fearful. On the
night that followed her baby was born.




CHAPTER III.



“_IT_ is a splendid boy,” said the nurse as she came in with the
new-born baby in her arms, “and perfect as a bit of sculpture. Just look
at that hand.”

“Faugh!” ejaculated Mrs. Dinneford, to whom this was addressed. Her
countenance expressed disgust. She turned her head away. “Hide the thing
from my sight!” she added, angrily. “Cover it up! smother it if you
will!”

“You are still determined?” said the nurse.

“Determined, Mrs. Bray; I am not the woman to look back when I have once
resolved. You know me.” Mrs. Dinneford said this passionately.

The two women were silent for a little while. Mrs. Bray, the nurse, kept
her face partly turned from Mrs. Dinneford. She was a short, dry, wiry
little woman, with French features, a sallow complexion and very black
eyes.

The doctor looked in. Mrs. Dinneford went quickly to the door, and
putting her hand on his arm, pressed him back, going out into the entry
with him and closing the door behind them. They talked for a short time
very earnestly.

“The whole thing is wrong,” said the doctor as he turned to go, “and I
will not be answerable for the consequences.”

“No one will require them at your hand, Doctor Radcliffe,” replied
Mrs. Dinneford. “Do the best you can for Edith. As for the rest, know
nothing, say nothing. You understand.”

Doctor Burt Radcliffe had a large practice among rich and fashionable
people. He had learned to be very considerate of their weaknesses,
peculiarities and moral obliquities. His business was to doctor them
when sick, to humor them when they only thought themselves sick, and to
get the largest possible fees for his, services. A great deal came under
his observation that he did not care to see, and of which he saw as
little as possible. From policy he had learned to be reticent. He held
family secrets enough to make, in the hands of a skillful writer, more
than a dozen romances of the saddest and most exciting character.

Mrs. Dinneford knew him thoroughly, and just how far to trust him. “Know
nothing, say nothing” was a good maxim in the case, and so she divulged
only the fact that the baby was to be cast adrift. His weak remonstrance
might as well not have been spoken, and he knew it.

While this brief interview was in progress, Nurse Bray sat with the baby
on her lap. She had taken the soft little hands into her own; and evil
and cruel though she was, an impulse of tenderness flowed into her heart
from the angels who were present with the innocent child. It grew
lovely in her eyes. Its helplessness stirred in her a latent instinct of
protection. “No no, it must not be,” she was saying to herself, when the
door opened and Mrs. Dinneford came back.

Mrs. Bray did not lift her head, but sat looking down at the baby and
toying with its hands.

“Pshaw!” ejaculated Mrs. Dinneford, in angry disgust, as she noticed
this manifestation of interest. “Bundle the thing up and throw into that
basket. Is the woman down stairs?”

“Yes,” replied Mrs. Bray as she slowly drew a light blanket over the
baby.

“Very well. Put it in the basket, and let her take it away.”

“She is not a good woman,” said the nurse, whose heart was failing her
at the last moment.

“She may be the devil for all I care,” returned Mrs. Dinneford.

Mrs. Bray did as she was ordered, but with an evident reluctance that
irritated Mrs. Dinneford.

“Go now and bring up the woman,” she said, sharply.

The woman was brought. She was past the prime of life, and had an evil
face. You read in it the record of bad passions indulged and the signs
of a cruel nature. She was poorly clad, and her garments unclean.

“You will take this child?” said Mrs. Dinneford abruptly, as the woman
came into her presence.

“I have agreed to do so,” she replied, looking toward Mrs. Bray.

“She is to have fifty dollars,” said the nurse.

“And that is to be the last of it!” Mrs. Dinneford's face was pale, and
she spoke in a hard, husky voice.

Opening her purse, she took from it a small roll of bills, and as she
held out the money said, slowly and with a hard emphasis,

“You understand the terms. I do not know you--not even your name. I
don't wish to know you. For this consideration you take the child away.
That is the end of it between you and me. The child is your own as much
as if he were born to you, and you can do with him as you please. And
now go.” Mrs. Dinneford waved her hand.

“His name?” queried the woman.

“He has no name!” Mrs. Dinneford stamped her foot in angry impatience.

The woman stooped down, and taking up the basket, tucked the covering
that had been laid over the baby close about its head, so that no one
could see what she carried, and went off without uttering another word.

It was some moments before either Mrs. Dinneford or the nurse spoke.
Mrs. Bray was first to break silence.

“All this means a great deal more than you have counted on,” she said,
in a voice that betrayed some little feeling. “To throw a tender baby
out like that is a hard thing. I am afraid--”

“There, there! no more of that,” returned Mrs. Dinneford, impatiently.
“It's ugly work, I own, but it had to be done--like cutting off a
diseased limb. He will die, of course, and the sooner it is over, the
better for him and every one else.”

“He will have a hard struggle for life, poor little thing!” said the
nurse. “I would rather see him dead.”

Mrs. Dinneford, now that this wicked and cruel deed was done, felt ill
at ease. She pushed the subject away, and tried to bury it out of sight
as we bury the dead, but did not find the task an easy one.

What followed the birth and removal of Edith's baby up to the time of
her return to reason after long struggle for life, has already been
told. Her demand to have her baby--“Oh, mother, bring me my baby!
I shall die if you do not!” and the answer, “Your baby is in
heaven!”--sent the feeble life-currents back again upon her heart. There
was another long period of oblivion, out of which she came very slowly,
her mind almost as much a blank as the mind of a child.

She had to learn again the names of things, and to be taught their use.
It was touching to see the untiring devotion of her father, and the
pleasure he took in every new evidence of mental growth. He went
over the alphabet with her, letter by letter, many times each day,
encouraging her and holding her thought down to the unintelligible signs
with a patient tenderness sad yet beautiful to see; and when she began
to combine letters into words, and at last to put words together, his
delight was unbounded.

Very slowly went on the new process of mental growth, and it was months
before thought began to reach out beyond the little world that lay just
around her.

Meanwhile, Edith's husband had been brought to trial for forgery,
convicted and sentenced to the State's prison for a term of years. His
partner came forward as the chief witness, swearing that he had believed
the notes genuine, the firm having several times had the use of Mr.
Dinneford's paper, drawn to the order of Granger.

Ere the day of trial came the poor young man was nearly broken-hearted.
Public disgrace like this, added to the terrible private wrongs he was
suffering, was more than he had the moral strength to bear. Utterly
repudiated by his wife's family, and not even permitted to see Edith, he
only knew that she was very ill. Of the birth of his baby he had but
a vague intimation. A rumor was abroad that it had died, but he could
learn nothing certain. In his distress and uncertainty he called on Dr.
Radcliffe, who replied to his questions with a cold evasion. “It was
put out to nurse,” said the doctor, “and that is all I know about it.”
 Beyond this he would say nothing.

Granger was not taken to the State's prison after his sentence, but
to an insane asylum. Reason gave way under the terrible ordeal through
which he had been made to pass.

“Mother,” said Edith, one day, in a tone that caused Mrs. Dinneford's
heart to leap. She was reading a child's simple story-book, and looked
up as she spoke. Her eyes were wide open and full of questions.

“What, my dear?” asked Mrs. Dinneford, repressing her feelings and
trying to keep her voice calm.

“There's something I can't understand, mother.” She looked down at
herself, then about the room. Her manner was becoming nervous.

“What can't you understand?”

Edith shut her hands over her eyes and remained very still. When
she removed them, and her mother looked into her face the childlike
sweetness and content were all gone, and a conscious woman was before
her. The transformation was as sudden as it was marvelous.

Both remained silent for the space of nearly a minute. Mrs. Dinneford
knew not what to say, and waited for some sign from her daughter.

“Where is my baby, mother?” Edith said this in a low, tremulous whisper,
leaning forward as she spoke, repressed and eager.

“Have you forgotten?” asked Mrs. Dinneford, with regained composure.

“Forgotten what?”

“You were very ill after your baby was born; no one thought you could
live; you were ill for a long time. And the baby--”

“What of the baby, mother?” asked Edith, beginning to tremble violently.
Her mother, perceiving her agitation, held back the word that was on her
lips.

“What of the baby, mother?” Edith repeated the question.

“It died,” said Mrs. Dinneford, turning partly away. She could not look
at her child and utter this cruel falsehood.

“Dead! Oh, mother, don't say that! The baby can't be dead!”

A swift flash of suspicion came into her eyes.

“I have said it, my child,” was the almost stern response of Mrs.
Dinneford. “The baby is dead.”

A weight seemed to fall on Edith. She bent forward, crouching down until
her elbows rested on her knees and her hands supported her head. Thus
she sat, rocking her body with a slight motion. Mrs. Dinneford watched
her without speaking.

“And what of George?” asked Edith, checking her nervous movement at
last.

Her mother did not reply. Edith waited a moment, and then lifted herself
erect.

“What of George?” she demanded.

“My poor child!” exclaimed Mrs. Dinneford, with a gush of genuine pity,
putting her arms about Edith and drawing her head against her bosom. “It
is more than you have strength to bear.”

“You must tell me,” the daughter said, disengaging herself. “I have
asked for my husband.”

“Hush! You must not utter that word again;” and Mrs. Dinneford put her
fingers on Edith's lips. “The wretched man you once called by that name
is a disgraced criminal. It is better that you know the worst.”

When Mr. Dinneford came home, instead of the quiet, happy child he
had left in the morning, he found a sad, almost broken-hearted woman,
refusing to be comforted. The wonder was that under the shock of this
terrible awakening, reason had not been again and hopelessly dethroned.

After a period of intense suffering, pain seemed to deaden sensibility.
She grew calm and passive. And now Mrs. Dinneford set herself to the
completion of the work she had begun. She had compassed the ruin of
Granger in order to make a divorce possible; she had cast the baby
adrift that no sign of the social disgrace might remain as an impediment
to her first ambition. She would yet see her daughter in the position
to which she had from the beginning resolved to lift her, cost what it
might. But the task was not to be an easy one.

After a period of intense suffering, as we have said, Edith grew calm
and passive. But she was never at ease with her mother, and seemed to
be afraid of her. To her father she was tender and confiding. Mrs.
Dinneford soon saw that if Edith's consent to a divorce from her husband
was to be obtained, it must come through her father's influence; for
if she but hinted at the subject, it was met with a flash of almost
indignant rejection. So her first work was to bring her husband over to
her side. This was not difficult, for Mr. Dinneford felt the disgrace
of having for a son-in-law a condemned criminal, who was only saved from
the State's prison by insanity. An insane criminal was not worthy to
hold the relation of husband to his pure and lovely child.

After a feeble opposition to her father's arguments and persuasions,
Edith yielded her consent. An application for a divorce was made, and
speedily granted.




CHAPTER IV.



_OUT_ of this furnace Edith came with a new and purer spirit. She had
been thrust in a shrinking and frightened girl; she came out a woman in
mental stature, in feeling and self-consciousness.

The river of her life, which had cut for itself a deeper channel, lay
now so far down that it was out of the sight of common observation. Even
her mother failed to apprehend its drift and strength. Her father knew
her better. To her mother she was reserved and distant; to her father,
warm and confiding. With the former she would sit for hours without
speaking unless addressed; with the latter she was pleased and social,
and grew to be interested in what interested him. As mentioned, Mr.
Dinneford was a man of wealth and leisure, and active in many public
charities. He had come to be much concerned for the neglected and
cast-off children of poor and vicious parents, thousands upon thousands
of whom were going to hopeless ruin, unthought of and uncared for by
Church or State, and their condition often formed the subject of his
conversation as well at home as elsewhere.

Mrs. Dinneford had no sympathy with her husband in this direction. A
dirty, vicious child was an offence to her, not an object of pity, and
she felt more like, spurning it with her foot than touching it with
her hand. But it was not so with Edith; she listened to her father, and
became deeply interested in the poor, suffering, neglected little ones
whose sad condition he could so vividly portray, for the public duties
of charity to which he was giving a large part of his time made him
familiar with much that was sad and terrible in human suffering and
degradation.

One day Edith said to her father,

“I saw a sight this morning that made me sick. It has haunted me ever
since. Oh, it was dreadful!”

“What was it?” asked Mr. Dinneford.

“A sick baby in the arms of a half-drunken woman. It made me shiver to
look at its poor little face, wasted by hunger and sickness and purple
with cold. The woman sat at the street corner begging, and the people
went by, no one seeming to care for the helpless, starving baby in her
arms. I saw a police-officer almost touch the woman as he passed. Why
did he not arrest her?”

“That was not his business,” replied Mr. Dinneford. “So long as she did
not disturb the peace, the officer had nothing to do with her.”

“Who, then, has?”

“Nobody.”

“Why, father!” exclaimed Edith. “Nobody?”

“The woman was engaged in business. She was a beggar, and the sick,
half-starved baby was her capital in trade,” replied Mr. Dinneford.
“That policeman had no more authority to arrest her than he had to
arrest the organ-man or the peanut-vender.”

“But somebody should see after a poor baby like that. Is there no law to
meet such cases?”

“The poor baby has no vote,” replied Mr. Dinneford, “and law-makers
don't concern themselves much about that sort of constituency; and even
if they did, the executors of law would be found indifferent. They are
much more careful to protect those whose business it is to make drunken
beggars like the one you saw, who, if men, can vote and give them place
and power. The poor baby is far beneath their consideration.”

“But not of Him,” said Edith, with eyes full of tears, “who took little
children in his arms and blessed them, and said, Suffer them to come
unto me and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven.”

“Our law-makers are not, I fear, of his kingdom,” answered Mr.
Dinneford, gravely, “but of the kingdom of this world.”

A little while after, Edith, who had remained silent and thoughtful,
said, with a tremor in her voice,

“Father, did you see my baby?”

Mr. Dinneford started at so unexpected a question, surprised and
disturbed. He did not reply, and Edith put the question again.

“No, my dear,” he answered, with a hesitation of manner that was almost
painful.

After looking into his face steadily for some moments, Edith dropped her
eyes to the floor, and there was a constrained silence between them for
a good while.

“You never saw it?” she queried, again lifting her eyes to her father's
face. Her own was much paler than when she first put the question.

“Never.”

“Why?” asked Edith.

She waited for a little while, and then said,

“Why don't you answer me, father?”

“It was never brought to me.”

“Oh, father!”

“You were very ill, and a nurse was procured immediately.”

“I was not too sick to see my baby,” said Edith, with white, quivering
lips. “If they had laid it in my bosom as soon as it was born, I would
never have been so ill, and the baby would not have died. If--if--”

She held back what she was about saying, shutting her lips tightly. Her
face remained very pale and strangely agitated. Nothing more was then
said.

A day or two afterward, Edith asked her mother, with an abruptness that
sent the color to her face, “Where was my baby buried?”

“In our lot at Fairview,” was replied, after a moment's pause.

Edith said no more, but on that very day, regardless of a heavy rain
that was falling, went out to the cemetery alone and searched in the
family lot for the little mound that covered her baby--searched, but did
not find it. She came back so changed in appearance that when her mother
saw her she exclaimed,

“Why, Edith! Are you sick?”

“I have been looking for my baby's grave and cannot find it,” she
answered. “There is something wrong, mother. What was done with my baby?
I must know.” And she caught her mother's wrists with both of her hands
in a tight grip, and sent searching glances down through her eyes.

“Your baby is dead,” returned Mrs. Dinneford, speaking slowly and with
a hard deliberation. “As for its grave--well, if you will drag up the
miserable past, know that in my anger at your wretched _mesalliance_ I
rejected even the dead body of your miserable husband's child, and would
not even suffer it to lie in our family ground. You know how bitterly I
was disappointed, and I am not one of the kind that forgets or forgives
easily. I may have been wrong, but it is too late now, and the past may
as well be covered out of sight.”

“Where, then, was my baby buried?” asked Edith, with a calm resolution
of manner that was not to be denied.

“I do not know. I did not care at the time, and never asked.”

“Who can tell me?”

“I don't know.”

“Who took my baby to nurse?”

“I have forgotten the woman's name. All I know is that she is dead. When
the child died, I sent her money, and told her to bury it decently.”

“Where did she live?”

“I never knew precisely. Somewhere down town.”

“Who brought her here? who recommended her?” said Edith, pushing her
inquiries rapidly.

“I have forgotten that also,” replied Mrs. Dinneford, maintaining her
coldness of manner.

“My nurse, I presume,” said Edith. “I have a faint recollection of
her--a dark little woman with black eyes whom I had never seen before.
What was her name?”

“Bodine,” answered Mrs. Dinneford, without a moment's hesitation.

“Where does she live?”

“She went to Havana with a Cuban lady several months ago.”

“Do you know the lady's name?”

“It was Casteline, I think.”

Edith questioned no further. The mother and daughter were still sitting
together, both deeply absorbed in thought, when a servant opened the
door and said to Mrs. Dinneford,

“A lady wishes to see you.”

“Didn't she give you her card?”

“No ma'am.”

“Nor send up her name?”

“No, ma'am.”

“Go down and ask her name.”

The servant left the room. On returning, she said,

“Her name is Mrs. Bray.”

Mrs. Dinneford turned her face quickly, but not in time to prevent Edith
from seeing by its expression that she knew her visitor, and that her
call was felt to be an unwelcome one. She went from the room without
speaking. On entering the parlor, Mrs. Dinneford said, in a low, hurried
voice,

“I don't want you to come here, Mrs. Bray. If you wish to see me send me
word, and I will call on you, but you must on no account come here.”

“Why? Is anything wrong?”

“Yes.”

“What?”

“Edith isn't satisfied about the baby, has been out to Fairview looking
for its grave, wants to know who her nurse was.”

“What did you tell her?”

“I said that your name was Mrs. Bodine, and that you had gone to Cuba.”

“Do you think she would know me?”

“Can't tell; wouldn't like to run the risk of her seeing you here. Pull
down your veil. There! close. She said, a little while ago, that she had
a faint recollection of you as a dark little woman with black eyes whom
she had never seen before.”

“Indeed!” and Mrs. Bray gathered her veil close about her face.

“The baby isn't living?” Mrs. Dinneford asked the question in a whisper.

“Yes.”

“Oh, it can't be! Are you sure?”

“Yes; I saw it day before yesterday.”

“You did! Where?”

“On the street, in the arms of a beggar-woman.”

“You are deceiving me!” Mrs. Dinneford spoke with a throb of anger in
her voice.

“As I live, no! Poor little thing! half starved and half frozen. It
'most made me sick.”

“It's impossible! You could not know that it was Edith's baby.”

“I do know,” replied Mrs. Bray, in a voice that left no doubt on Mrs.
Dinneford's mind.

“Was the woman the same to whom we gave the baby?”

“No; she got rid of it in less than a month.”

“What did she do with it?”

“Sold it for five dollars, after she had spent all the money she
received from you in drink and lottery-policies.”

“Sold it for five dollars!”

“Yes, to two beggar-women, who use it every day, one in the morning and
the other in the afternoon, and get drunk on the money they receive,
lying all night in some miserable den.”

Mrs. Dinneford gave a little shiver.

“What becomes of the baby when they are not using it?” she asked.

“They pay a woman a dollar a week to take care of it at night.”

“Do you know where this woman lives?”

“Yes.”

“Were you ever there?”

“Yes.”

“What kind of a place is it?”

“Worse than a dog-kennel.”

“What does all this mean?” demanded Mrs. Dinneford, with repressed
excitement. “Why have you so kept on the track of this baby, when you
knew I wished it lost sight of?”

“I had my own reasons,” replied Mrs. Bray. “One doesn't know what may
come of an affair like this, and it's safe to keep well up with it.”

Mrs. Dinneford bit her lips till the blood almost came through. A faint
rustle of garments in the hall caused her to start. An expression of
alarm crossed her face.

“Go now,” she said, hurriedly, to her visitor; “I will call and see you
this afternoon.”

Mrs. Bray quietly arose, saying, as she did so, “I shall expect you,”
 and went away.

There was a menace in her tone as she said, “I shall expect you,” that
did not escape the ears of Mrs. Dinneford.

Edith was in the hall, at some distance from the parlor door. Mrs. Bray
had to pass her as she went out. Edith looked at her intently.

“Who is that woman?” she asked, confronting her mother, after the
visitor was gone.

“If you ask the question in a proper manner, I shall have no objection
to answer,” said Mrs. Dinneford, with a dignified and slightly offended
air; “but my daughter is assuming rather, too much.”

“Mrs. Bray, the servant said.”

“No, Mrs. Gray.”

“I understood her to say Mrs. Bray.”

“I can't help what you understood.” The mother spoke with some asperity
of manner. “She calls herself Gray, but you can have it anything you
please; it won't change her identity.”

“What did she want?”

“To see me.”

“I know.” Edith was turning away with an expression on her face that
Mrs. Dinneford did not like, so she said,

“She is in trouble, and wants me to help her, if you must know. She
used to be a dressmaker, and worked for me before you were born; she got
married, and then her troubles began. Now she is a widow with a house
full of little children, and not half bread enough to feed them. I've
helped her a number of times already, but I'm getting tired of it; she
must look somewhere else, and I told her so.”

Edith turned from her mother with an unsatisfied manner, and went up
stairs. Mrs. Dinneford was surprised, not long afterward, to meet her at
her chamber door, dressed to go out. This was something unusual.

“Where are you going?” she asked, not concealing her surprise.

“I have a little errand out,” Edith replied.

This was not satisfactory to her mother. She asked other questions, but
Edith gave only evasive answers.

On leaving the house, Edith walked quickly, like one in earnest about
something; her veil was closely drawn. Only a few blocks from where she
lived was the office of Dr. Radcliffe. Hither she directed her steps.

“Why, Edith, child!” exclaimed the doctor, not concealing the surprise
he felt at seeing her. “Nobody sick, I hope?”

“No one,” she answered.

There was a momentary pause; then Edith said, abruptly,

“Doctor, what became of my baby?”

“It died,” answered Doctor Radcliffe, but not without betraying some
confusion. The question had fallen upon him too suddenly.

“Did you see it after it was dead?” She spoke in a firm voice, looking
him steadily in the face.

“No,” he replied, after a slight hesitation.

“Then how do you know that it died?” Edith asked.

“I had your mother's word for it,” said the doctor.

“What was done with my baby after it was born?”

“It was given out to nurse.”

“With your consent?”

“I did not advise it. Your mother had her own views in the case. It was
something over which I had no control.”

“And you never saw it after it was taken away?”

“Never.”

“And do not really know whether it be dead or living?”

“Oh, it's dead, of course, my child. There is no doubt of that,” said
the doctor, with sudden earnestness of manner.

“Have you any evidence of the fact?”

“My dear, dear child,” answered the doctor, with much feeling, “it is
all wrong. Why go back over this unhappy ground? why torture yourself
for nothing? Your baby died long ago, and is in heaven.”

“Would God I could believe it!” she exclaimed, in strong agitation. “If
it were so, why is not the evidence set before me? I question my mother;
I ask for the nurse who was with me when my baby was born, and for the
nurse to whom it was given afterward, and am told that they are dead or
out of the country. I ask for my baby's grave, but it cannot be found.
I have searched for it where my mother told me it was, but the grave
is not there. Why all this hiding and mystery? Doctor, you said that my
baby was in heaven, and I answered, 'Would God it were so!' for I saw a
baby in hell not long ago!”

The doctor was scared. He feared that Edith was losing her mind, she
looked and spoke so wildly.

“A puny, half-starved, half-frozen little thing, in the arms of a
drunken beggar,” she added. “And, doctor, an awful thought has haunted
me ever since.”

“Hush, hush!” said the doctor, who saw what was in her mind. “You must
not indulge such morbid fancies.”

“It is that I may not indulge them that I have come to you. I want
certainty, Dr. Radcliffe. Somebody knows all about my baby. Who was my
nurse?”

“I never saw her before the night of your baby's birth, and have never
seen her since. Your mother procured her.”

“Did you hear her name?”

“No.”

“And so you cannot help me at all?” said Edith, in a disappointed voice.

“I cannot, my poor child,” answered the doctor.

All the flush and excitement died out of Edith's face. When she arose to
go, she was pale and haggard, like one exhausted by pain, and her steps
uneven, like the steps of an invalid walking for the first time. Dr.
Radcliffe went with her in silence to the door.

“Oh, doctor,” said Edith, in a choking voice, as she lingered a moment
on the steps, “can't you bring out of this frightful mystery something
for my heart to rest upon? I want the truth. Oh, doctor, in pity help me
to find the truth!”

“I am powerless to help you,” the doctor replied. “Your only hope lies
in your mother. She knows all about it; I do not.”

And he turned and left her standing at the door. Slowly she descended
the steps, drawing her veil as she did so about her face, and walked
away more like one in a dream than conscious of the tide of life setting
so strongly all about her.




CHAPTER V.



_MEANTIME_, obeying the unwelcome summons, Mrs. Dinneford had gone to
see Mrs. Bray. She found her in a small third-story room in the lower
part of the city, over a mile away from her own residence. The meeting
between the two women was not over-gracious, but in keeping with their
relations to each other. Mrs. Dinneford was half angry and impatient;
Mrs. Bray cool and self-possessed.

“And now what is it you have to say?” asked the former, almost as soon
as she had entered.

“The woman to whom you gave that baby was here yesterday.”

A frightened expression came into Mrs. Dinneford's face. Mrs. Bray
watched her keenly as, with lips slightly apart, she waited for what
more was to come.

“Unfortunately, she met me just as I was at my own door, and so found
out my residence,” continued Mrs. Bray. “I was in hopes I should never
see her again. We shall have trouble, I'm afraid.”

“In what way?”

“A bad woman who has you in her power can trouble you in many ways,”
 answered Mrs. Bray.

“She did not know my name--you assured me of that. It was one of the
stipulations.”

“She does know, and your daughter's name also. And she knows where the
baby is. She's deeper than I supposed. It's never safe to trust such
people; they have no honor.”

Fear sent all the color out of Mrs. Dinneford's face.

“What does she want?”

“Money.”

“She was paid liberally.”

“That has nothing to do with it. These people have no honor, as I said;
they will get all they can.”

“How much does she want?”

“A hundred dollars; and it won't end there, I'm thinking. If she is
refused, she will go to your house; she gave me that alternative--would
have gone yesterday, if good luck had not thrown her in my way. I
promised to call on you and see what could be done.”

Mrs. Dinneford actually groaned in her fear and distress.

“Would you like to see her yourself?” coolly asked Mrs. Bray.

“Oh dear! no, no!” and the lady put up her hands in dismay.

“It might be best,” said her wily companion.

“No, no, no! I will have nothing to do with her! You must keep her away
from me,” replied Mrs. Dinneford, with increasing agitation.

“I cannot keep her away without satisfying her demands. If you were to
see her yourself, you would know just what her demands were. If you do
not see her, you will only have my word for it, and I am left open
to misapprehension, if not worse. I don't like to be placed in such a
position.”

And Mrs. Bray put on a dignified, half-injured manner.

“It's a wretched business in every way,” she added, “and I'm sorry that
I ever had anything to do with it. It's something dreadful, as I told
you at the time, to cast a helpless baby adrift in such a way. Poor
little soul! I shall never feel right about it.”

“That's neither here nor there;” and Mrs. Dinneford waved her hand
impatiently. “The thing now in hand is to deal with this woman.”

“Yes, that's it--and as I said just now, I would rather have you deal
with her yourself; you may be able to do it better than I can.”

“It's no use to talk, Mrs. Bray. I will not see the woman.”

“Very well; you must be your own judge in the case.”

“Can't you bind her up to something, or get her out of the city? I'd
pay almost anything to have her a thousand miles away. See if you can't
induce her to go to New Orleans. I'll pay her passage, and give her a
hundred dollars besides, if she'll go.”

Mrs. Bray smiled a faint, sinister smile:

“If you could get her off there, it would be the end of her. She'd never
stand the fever.”

“Then get her off, cost what it may,” said Mrs. Dinneford.

“She will be here in less than half an hour.” Mrs. Bray looked at the
face of a small cheap clock that stood on the mantel.

“She will?” Mrs. Dinneford became uneasy, and arose from her chair.

“Yes; what shall I say to her?”

“Manage her the best you can. Here are thirty dollars--all the money I
have with me. Give her that, and promise more if necessary. I will see
you again.”

“When?” asked Mrs. Bray.

“At any time you desire.”

“Then you had better come to-morrow morning. I shall not go out.”

“I will be here at eleven o'clock. Induce her if possible to leave the
city--to go South, so that she may never come back.”

“The best I can shall be done,” replied Mrs. Bray as she folded the
bank-bills she had received from Mrs. Dinneford in a fond, tender sort
of way and put them into her pocket.

Mrs. Dinneford retired, saying as she did so,

“I will be here in the morning.”

An instant change came over the shallow face of the wiry little woman as
the form of Mrs. Dinneford vanished through the door. A veil seemed to
fall away from it. All its virtuous sobriety was gone, and a smile of
evil satisfaction curved about her lips and danced in her keen black
eyes. She stood still, listening to the retiring steps of her visitor,
until she heard the street door shut. Then, with a quick, cat-like step,
she crossed to the opposite side of the room, and pushed open a door
that led to an adjoining chamber. A woman came forward to meet her. This
woman was taller and stouter than Mrs. Bray, and had a soft, sensual
face, but a resolute mouth, the under jaw slightly protruding. Her eyes
were small and close together, and had that peculiar wily and alert
expression you sometimes see, making you think of a serpent's eyes. She
was dressed in common finery and adorned by cheap jewelry.

“What do you think of that, Pinky Swett?” exclaimed Mrs. Bray, in a
voice of exultation. “Got her all right, haven't I?”

“Well, you have!” answered the woman, shaking all over with unrestrained
laughter. “The fattest pigeon I've happened to see for a month of
Sundays. Is she very rich?”

“Her husband is, and that's all the same. And now, Pinky”--Mrs. Bray
assumed a mock gravity of tone and manner--“you know your fate--New
Orleans and the yellow fever. You must pack right off. Passage free and
a hundred dollars for funeral expenses. Nice wet graves down there--keep
off the fire;” and she gave a low chuckle.

“Oh yes; all settled. When does the next steamer sail?” and Pinky almost
screamed with merriment. She had been drinking.

“H-u-s-h! h-u-s-h! None of that here, Pinky. The people down stairs are
good Methodists, and think me a saint.”

“You a saint? Oh dear!” and she shook with repressed enjoyment.

After this the two women grew serious, and put their heads together for
business.

“Who is this woman, Fan? What's her name, and where does she live?”
 asked Pinky Swett.

“That's my secret, Pinky,” replied Mrs. Bray, “and I can't let it go; it
wouldn't be safe. You get a little off the handle sometimes, and don't
know what you say--might let the cat out of the bag. Sally Long took the
baby away, and she died two months ago; so I'm the only one now in
the secret. All I want of you is to keep track of the baby. Here is a
five-dollar bill; I can't trust you with more at a time. I know your
weakness, Pinky;” and she touched her under the chin in a familiar,
patronizing way.

Pinky wasn't satisfied with this, and growled a little, just showing her
teeth like an unquiet dog.

“Give me ten,” she said; “the woman gave you thirty. I heard her say so.
And she's going to bring you seventy to-morrow.”

“You'll only waste it, Pinky,” remonstrated Mrs. Bray. “It will all be
gone before morning.”

“Fan,” said the woman, leaning toward Mrs. Bray and speaking in a low,
confidential tone, “I dreamed of a cow last night, and that's good
luck, you know. Tom Oaks made a splendid hit last Saturday--drew twenty
dollars--and Sue Minty got ten. They're all buzzing about it down in our
street, and going to Sam McFaddon's office in a stream.”

“Do they have good luck at Sam McFaddon's?” asked Mrs. Bray, with
considerable interest in her manner.

“It's the luckiest place that I know. Never dreamed of a cow or a hen
that I didn't make a hit, and I dreamed of a cow last night. She was
giving such a splendid pail of milk, full to the brim, just as old Spot
and Brindle used to give. You remember our Spot and Brindle, Fan?”

“Oh yes.” There was a falling inflection in Mrs. Bray's voice, as if
the reference had sent her thoughts away back to other and more innocent
days.

The two women sat silent for some moments after that; and when Pinky
spoke, which she did first, it was in lower and softer tones:

“I don't like to think much about them old times, Fan; do you? I might
have done better. But it's no use grizzling about it now. What's done's
done, and can't be helped. Water doesn't run up hill again after it's
once run down. I've got going, and can't stop, you see. There's nothing
to catch at that won't break as soon as you touch it. So I mean to be
jolly as I move along.”

“Laughing is better than crying at any time,” returned Mrs. Bray; “here
are five more;” and she handed Pinky Swett another bank-bill. “I'm going
to try my luck. Put half a dollar on ten different rows, and we'll go
shares on what is drawn. I dreamed the other night that I saw a flock of
sheep, and that's good luck, isn't it?”

Pinky thrust her hand into her pocket and drew out a worn and soiled
dream-book.

“A flock of sheep; let me see;” and she commenced turning over the
leaves. “Sheep; here it is: 'To see them is a sign of sorrow--11, 20,
40, 48. To be surrounded by many sheep denotes good luck--2, 11, 55.'
That's your row; put down 2, 11, 55. We'll try that. Next put down 41
11, 44--that's the lucky row when you dream of a cow.”

As Pinky leaned toward her friend she dropped her parasol.

“That's for luck, maybe,” she said, with a brightening face. “Let's see
what it says about a parasol;” and she turned over her dream-book.

“For a maiden to dream she loses her parasol shows that her sweetheart
is false and will never marry her--5, 51, 56.”

“But you didn't dream about a parasol, Pinky.”

“That's no matter; it's just as good as a dream. 5, 51, 56 is the row.
Put that down for the second, Fan.”

As Mrs. Bray was writing out these numbers the clock on the mantel
struck five.

“8, 12, 60,” said Pinky, turning to the clock; “that's the clock row.”

And Mrs. Bray put down these figures also.

“That's three rows,” said Pinky, “and we want ten.” She arose, as she
spoke, and going to the front window, looked down upon the street.

“There's an organ-grinder; it's the first thing I saw;” and she came
back fingering the leaves of her dream-book. “Put down 40, 50, 26.”

Mrs. Bray wrote the numbers on her slip of paper.

“It's November; let's find the November row.” Pinky consulted her book
again. “Signifies you will have trouble through life--7, 9, 63. That's
true as preaching; I was born in November, and I've had it all trouble.
How many rows does that make?”

“Five.”

“Then we will cut cards for the rest;” and Pinky drew a soiled pack from
her pocket, shuffled the cards and let her friends cut them.

“Ten of diamonds;” she referred to the dream-book. “10, 13, 31; put that
down.”

The cards were shuffled and cut again.

“Six of clubs--6, 35, 39.”

Again they were cut and shuffled. This time the knave of clubs was
turned up.

“That's 17, 19, 28,” said Pinky, reading from her book.

The next cut gave the ace of clubs, and the policy numbers were 18, 63,
75.

“Once more, and the ten rows will be full;” and the cards were cut
again.

“Five of hearts--5, 12, 60;” and the ten rows were complete.

“There's luck there, Fan; sure to make a hit,” said Pinky, with almost
childish confidence, as she gazed at the ten rows of figures. “One
of 'em can't help coming out right, and that would be fifty
dollars--twenty-five for me and twenty-five for you; two rows would give
a hundred dollars, and the whole ten a thousand. Think of that, Fan!
five hundred dollars apiece.”

“It would break Sam McFaddon, I'm afraid,” remarked Mrs. Bray.

“Sam's got nothing to do with it,” returned Pinky.

“He hasn't?”

“No.”

“Who has, then?”

“His backer.”

“What's that?”

“Oh, I found it all out--I know how it's done. Sam's got a backer--a man
that puts up the money. Sam only sells for his backer. When there's a
hit, the backer pays.”

“Who's Sam's backer, as you call him?”

“Couldn't get him to tell; tried him hard, but he was close as an
oyster. Drives in the Park and wears a two thousand dollar diamond pin;
he let that out. So he's good for the hits. Sam always puts the money
down, fair and square.”

“Very well; you get the policy, and do it right off, Pinky, or the
money'll slip through your fingers.”

“All right,” answered Pinky as she folded the slip of paper containing
the lucky rows. “Never you fear. I'll be at Sam McFaddon's in ten
minutes after I leave here.”

“And be sure,” said Mrs. Bray, “to look after the baby to-night, and see
that it doesn't perish with cold; the air's getting sharp.”

“It ought to have something warmer than cotton rags on its poor little
body,” returned Pinky. “Can't you get it some flannel? It will die if
you don't.”

“I sent it a warm petticoat last week,” said Mrs. Bray.

“You did?”

“Yes; I bought one at a Jew shop, and had it sent to the woman.”

“Was it a nice warm one?”

“Yes.”

Pinky drew a sigh. “I saw the poor baby last night; hadn't anything on
but dirty cotton rags. It was lying asleep in a cold cellar on a little
heap of straw. The woman had given it something, I guess, by the way
it slept. The petticoat had gone, most likely, to Sam McFaddon's. She
spends everything she can lay her hands on in policies and whisky.”

“She's paid a dollar a week for taking care of the baby at night and on
Sundays,” said Mrs. Bray.

“It wouldn't help the baby any if she got ten dollars,” returned Pinky.
“It ought to be taken away from her.”

“But who's to do that? Sally Long sold it to the two beggar women, and
they board it out. I have no right to interfere; they own the baby, and
can do as they please with it.”

“It could be got to the almshouse,” said Pinky; “it would be a thousand
times better off.”

“It mustn't go to the almshouse,” replied Mrs. Bray; “I might lose track
of it, and that would never do.”

“You'll lose track of it for good and all before long, if you don't get
it out of them women's bands. No baby can hold out being begged with
long; it's too hard on the little things. For you know how it is, Fan;
they must keep 'em half starved and as sick as they will bear without
dying right off, so as to make 'em look pitiful. You can't do much at
begging with a fat, hearty-looking baby.”

“What's to be done about it?” asked Mrs. Bray. “I don't want that baby
to die.”

“Would its mother know it if she saw it?” asked Pinky.

“No; for she never set eyes on it.”

“Then, if it dies, get another baby, and keep track of that. You can
steal one from a drunken mother any night in the week. I'll do it for
you. One baby is as good as another.”

“It will be safer to have the real one,” replied Mrs. Bray. “And now,
Pinky that you have put this thing into my head, I guess I'll commission
you to get the baby away from that woman.”

“All right!”

“But what are we to do with it? I can't have it here.”

“Of course you can't. But that's easily managed, if your're willing to
pay for it.”

“Pay for it?”

“Yes; if it isn't begged with, and made to pay its way and earn
something into the bargain, it's got to be a dead weight on somebody. So
you see how it is, Fan. Now, if you'll take a fool's advice, you'll
let 'it go to the almshouse, or let it alone to die and get out of its
misery as soon as possible. You can find another baby that will do just
as well, if you should ever need one.”

“How much would it cost, do you think, to have it boarded with some one
who wouldn't abuse it? She might beg with it herself, or hire it out two
or three times a week. I guess it would stand that.”

“Beggars don't belong to the merciful kind,” answered Pinky; “there's no
trusting any of them. A baby in their hands is never safe. I've seen 'em
brought in at night more dead than alive, and tossed on a dirty rag-heap
to die before morning. I'm always glad when they're out of their misery,
poor things! The fact is, Fan, if you expect that baby to live, you've
got to take it clean out of the hands of beggars.”

“What could I get it boarded for outright?” asked Mrs. Bray.

“For 'most anything, 'cording to how it's done. But why not, while
you're about it, bleed the old lady, its grandmother, a little deeper,
and take a few drops for the baby?”

“Guess you're kind o' right about that, Fan; anyhow, we'll make a start
on it. You find another place for the brat.”

“'Greed; when shall I do it?”

“The sooner, the better. It might die of cold any night in that horrible
den. Ugh!”

“I've been in worse places. Bedlow street is full of them, and so is
Briar street and Dirty alley. You don't know anything about it.”

“Maybe not, and maybe I don't care to know. At present I want to settle
about this baby. You'll find another place for it?”

“Yes.”

“And then steal it from the woman who has it now?”

“Yes; no trouble in the world. She's drunk every night,” answered Pinky
Swett, rising to go.

“You'll see me to-morrow?” said Mrs. Bray.

“Oh yes.”

“And you won't forget about the policies?”

“Not I. We shall make a grand hit, or I'm a fool. Day-day!” Pinky waved
her hand gayly, and then retired.




CHAPTER VI.



_A COLD_ wet drizzling rain was beginning to fall when Pinky Swett
emerged from the house. Twilight was gathering drearily. She drew her
thin shawl closely, and shivered as the east wind struck her with a
chill.

At hurried walk of five or ten minutes brought her to a part of the town
as little known to its citizens generally as if it were in the centre
of Africa--a part of the town where vice, crime, drunkenness and beggary
herd together in the closest and most shameless contact; where men and
women, living in all foulness, and more like wild beasts than human
beings, prey greedily upon each other, hurting, depraving and marring
God's image in all over whom they can get power or influenced--_a very
hell upon the earth!_--at part of the town where theft and robbery and
murder are plotted, and from which prisons and almshouses draw their
chief population.

That such a herding together, almost in the centre of a great Christian
city, of the utterly vicious and degraded, should be permitted, when
every day's police and criminal records give warning of its cost
and danger, is a marvel and a reproach. Almost every other house, in
portions of this locality, is a dram-shop, where the vilest liquors are
sold. Policy-offices, doing business in direct violation of law, are in
every street and block, their work of plunder and demoralization going
on with open doors and under the very eyes of the police. Every one of
them is known to these officers. But arrest is useless. A hidden and
malign influence, more potent than justice, has power to protect the
traffic and hold the guilty offenders harmless. Conviction is rarely, if
ever, reached.

The poor wretches, depraved and plundered through drink and
policy-gambling, are driven into crime. They rob and steal and debase
themselves for money with which to buy rum and policies, and sooner or
later the prison or death removes the greater number of them from their
vile companions. But drifting toward this fatal locality under the
attraction of affinity, or lured thither by harpies in search of new
supplies of human victims to repair the frightful waste perpetually
made, the region keeps up its dense population, and the work of
destroying human souls goes on. It is an awful thing to contemplate.
Thousands of men and women, boys and girls, once innocent as the
babes upon whom Christ laid his hand in blessing, are drawn into this
whirlpool of evil every year, and few come out except by the way of
prison or death.

It was toward this locality that Pinky Swett directed her feet, after
parting with Mrs. Bray. Darkness was beginning to settle down as she
turned off from one of the most populous streets, crowded at the time by
citizens on their way to quiet and comfortable homes, few if any of whom
had ever turned aside to look upon and get knowledge of the world or
crime and wretchedness so near at hand, but girdled in and concealed
from common observation.

Down a narrow street she turned from the great thoroughfare, walking
with quick steps, and shivering a little as the penetrating east wind
sent a chill of dampness through the thin shawl she drew closer and
closer about her shoulders. Nothing could be in stronger contrast than
the rows of handsome dwellings and stores that lined the streets through
which she had just passed, and the forlorn, rickety, unsightly and
tumble-down houses amid which she now found herself.

Pinky had gone only a little way when the sharp cries of a child cut the
air suddenly, the shrill, angry voice of a woman and the rapid fall of
lashes mingled with the cries. The child begged for mercy in tones of
agony, but the loud voice, uttering curses and imprecations, and the
cruel blows, ceased not. Pinky stopped and shivered. She felt the pain
of these blows, in her quickly-aroused sympathy, almost as much as
if they had been falling on her own person. Opposite to where she had
paused was a one-story frame house, or enclosed shed, as unsightly
without as a pig-pen, and almost as filthy within. It contained two
small rooms with very low ceilings. The only things in these rooms that
could be called furniture were an old bench, two chairs from which the
backs had been broken, a tin cup black with smoke and dirt, two or
three tin pans in the same condition, some broken crockery and an iron
skillet. Pinky stood still for a moment, shivering, as we have said. She
knew what the blows and the curses and the cries of pain meant; she had
heard them before. A depraved and drunken woman and a child ten years
old, who might or might not be her daughter, lived there. The child was
sent out every day to beg or steal, and if she failed to bring home a
certain sum of money, was cruelly beaten by the woman. Almost every
day the poor child was cut with lashes, often on the bare flesh; almost
every day her shrieks rang out from the miserable hovel. But there was
no one to interfere, no one to save her from the smarting blows, no one
to care what she suffered.

Pinky Swett could stand it no longer. She had often noticed the ragged
child, with her pale, starved face and large, wistful eyes, passing
in and out of this miserable woman's den, sometimes going to the
liquor-shops and sometimes to the nearest policy-office to spend for
her mother, if such the woman really was, the money she had gained by
begging.

With a sudden impulse, as a deep wail and a more piteous cry for mercy
smote upon her ears, Pinky sprang across the street and into the hovel.
The sight that met her eyes left no hesitation in her mind. Holding up
with one strong arm the naked body of the poor child--she had drawn the
clothes over her head--the infuriated woman was raining down blows from
a short piece of rattan upon the quivering flesh, already covered with
welts and bruises.

“Devil!” cried Pinky as she rushed upon this fiend in human shape and
snatched the little girl from her arm. “Do you want to kill the child?”

She might almost as well have assaulted a tigress.

The woman was larger, stronger, more desperate and more thoroughly given
over to evil passions than she. To thwart her in anything was to rouse
her into a fury. A moment she stood in surprise and bewilderment; in
the next, and ere Pinky had time to put herself on guard, she had sprung
upon her with a passionate cry that sounded more like that of a wild
beast than anything human. Clutching her by the throat with one hand,
and with the other tearing the child from her grasp, she threw the
frightened little thing across the room.

“Devil, ha!” screamed the woman; “devil!” and she tightened her grasp
on Pinky's throat, at the same time striking her in the face with her
clenched fist.

Like a war-horse that snuffs the battle afar off and rushes to the
conflict, so rushed the inhabitants of that foul neighborhood to the
spot from whence had come to their ears the familiar and not unwelcome
sound of strife. Even before Pinky had time to shake off her assailant,
the door of the hovel was darkened by a screen of eager faces. And
such faces! How little of God's image remained in them to tell of
their divine origination!--bloated and scarred, ashen pale and wasted,
hollow-eyed and red-eyed, disease looking out from all, yet all lighted
up with the keenest interest and expectancy.

Outside, the crowd swelled with a marvelous rapidity. Every cellar and
room and garret, every little alley and hidden rookery, “hawk's nest”
 and “wren's nest,” poured out its unseemly denizens, white and black,
old and young, male and female, the child of three years old, keen,
alert and self-protective, running to see the “row” side by side with
the toothless crone of seventy; or most likely passing her on the way.
Thieves, beggars, pick-pockets, vile women, rag-pickers and the like,
with the harpies who prey upon them, all were there to enjoy the show.

Within, a desperate fight was going on between Pinky Swett and the woman
from whose hands she had attempted to rescue the child--a fight in which
Pinky was getting the worst of it. One garment after another was torn
from her person, until little more than a single one remained.

“Here's the police! look out!” was cried at this juncture.

“Who cares for the police? Let 'em come,” boldly retorted the woman. “I
haven't done nothing; it's her that's come in drunk and got up a row.”

Pushing the crowd aside, a policeman entered the hovel.

“Here she is!” cried the woman, pointing toward Pinky, from whom she
had sprung back the moment she heard the word police. “She came in here
drunk and got up a row. I'm a decent woman, as don't meddle with nobody.
But she's awful when she gets drunk. Just look at her--been tearing her
clothes off!”

At this there was a shout of merriment from the crowd who had witnessed
the fight.

“Good for old Sal! she's one of 'em! Can't get ahead of old Sal, drunk
or sober!” and like expressions were shouted by one and another.

Poor Pinky, nearly stripped of her clothing, and with a great bruise
swelling under one of her eyes, bewildered and frightened at the aspect
of things around her, could make no acceptable defence.

“She ran over and pitched into Sal, so she did! I saw her! She made
the fight, she did!” testified one of the crowd; and acting on this
testimony and his own judgment of the case, the policeman said roughly,
as he laid his hand on Pinky.

“Pick up your duds and come along.”

Pinky lifted her torn garments from the dirty floor and gathered them
about her person as best she could, the crowd jeering all the time. A
pin here and there, furnished by some of the women, enabled her to get
them into a sort of shape and adjustment. Then she tried to explain the
affair to the policeman, but he would not listen.

“Come!” he said, sternly.

“What are you going to do with me?” she asked, not moving from where she
stood.

“Lock you up,” replied the policeman. “So come along.”

“What's the matter here?” demanded a tall, strongly-built woman,
pressing forward. She spoke with a foreign accent, and in a tone of
command. The motley crowd, above whom she towered, gave way for her as
she approached. Everything about the woman showed her to be superior in
mind and moral force to the unsightly wretches about her. She had the
fair skin, blue eyes and light hair of her nation. Her features were
strong, but not masculine. You saw in them no trace of coarse sensuality
or vicious indulgence.

“Here's Norah! here's the queen!” shouted a voice from the crowd.

“What's the matter here?” asked the woman as she gained an entrance to
the hovel.

“Going to lock up Pinky Swett,” said a ragged little girl who had forced
her way in.

“What for?” demanded the woman, speaking with the air of one in
authority.

“'Cause she wouldn't let old Sal beat Kit half to death,” answered the
child.

“Ho! Sal's a devil and Pinky's a fool to meddle with her.” Then turning
to the policeman, who still had his hand on the girl, she said,

“What're you goin' to do, John?”

“Goin' to lock her up. She's drunk an' bin a-fightin'.”

“You're not goin' to do any such thing.”

“I'm not drunk, and it's a lie if anybody says so,” broke in Pinky. “I
tried to keep this devil from beating the life out of poor little Kit,
and she pitched into me and tore my clothes off. That's what's the
matter.”

The policeman quietly removed his hand from Pinky's shoulder, and
glanced toward the woman named Sal, and stood as if waiting orders.

“Better lock _her_ up,” said the “queen,” as she had been called. Sal
snarled like a fretted wild beast.

“It's awful, the way she beats poor Kit,” chimed in the little girl who
had before spoken against her. “If I was Kit, I'd run away, so I would.”

“I'll wring your neck off,” growled Sal, in a fierce undertone, making a
dash toward the girl, and swearing frightfully. But the child shrank to
the side of the policeman.

“If you lay a finger on Kit to-night,” said the queen, “I'll have her
taken away, and you locked up into the the bargain.”

Sal responded with another snarl.

“Come.” The queen moved toward the door. Pinky followed, the policeman
offering no resistance. A few minutes later, and the miserable crowd of
depraved human beings had been absorbed again into cellar and garret,
hovel and rookery, to take up the thread of their evil and sensual
lives, and to plot wickedness, and to prey upon and deprave each
other--to dwell as to their inner and real lives among infernals, to be
in hell as to their spirits, while their bodies yet remained upon the
earth.

Pinky and her rescuer passed down the street for a short distance until
they came to another that was still narrower. On each side dim lights
shone from the houses, and made some revelation of what was going on
within. Here liquor was sold, and there policies. Here was a junk-shop,
and there an eating-saloon where for six cents you could make a meal out
of the cullings from beggars' baskets. Not very tempting to an ordinary
appetite was the display inside, nor agreeable to the nostrils the odors
that filled the atmosphere. But hunger like the swines', that was not
over-nice, satisfied itself amid these disgusting conglomerations, and
kept off starvation.

Along this wretched street, with scarcely an apology for a sidewalk,
moved Pinky and the queen, until they reached a small two-story frame
house that presented a different aspect from the wretched tenements amid
which it stood. It was clean upon the outside, and had, as contrasted
with its neighbors, an air of superiority. This was the queen's
residence. Inside, all was plain and homely, but clean and in order.

The excitement into which Pinky had been thrown was nearly over by this
time.

“You've done me a good turn, Norah,” she said as the door closed upon
them, “and I'll not soon forget you.”

“Ugh!” ejaculated Norah as she looked into Pinky's bruised face; “Sal's
hit you square in the eye; it'll be black as y'r boot by morning. I'll
get some cold water.”

A basin of cold water was brought, and Pinky held a wet cloth to the
swollen spot for a long time, hoping thereby not only to reduce the
swelling, but to prevent discoloration.

“Y'r a fool to meddle with Sal,” said Norah as she set the basin of
water before Pinky.

“Why don't you meddle with her? Why do you let her beat poor little Kit
the way she does?” demanded Pinky.

Norah shrugged her shoulders, and answered with no more feeling in her
voice than if she had been speaking of inanimate things:

“She's got to keep Kit up to her work.”

“Up to her work!”

“Yes; that's just it. Kit's lazy and cheats--buys cakes and candies; and
Sal has to come down on her; it's the way, you know. If Sal didn't come
down sharp on her all the while, Kit wouldn't bring her ten cents a day.
They all have to do it--so much a day or a lickin'; and a little lickin'
isn't any use--got to 'most kill some of 'em. We're used to it in here.
Hark!”

The screams of a child in pain rang out wildly, the sounds coming from
across the narrow street. Quick, hard strokes of a lash were heard at
the same time. Pinky turned a little pale.

“Only Mother Quig,” said Norah, with an indifferent air; “she has to do
it 'most every night--no getting along any other way with Tom. It beats
all how much he can stand.”

“Oh, Norah, won't she never stop?” cried Pinky, starting up. “I can't
bear it a minute longer.”

“Shut y'r ears. You've got to,” answered the woman, with some impatience
in her voice. “Tom has to be kept to his work as well as the rest of
'em. Half the fuss he's making is put on, anyhow; he doesn't mind a
beating any more than a horse. I know his hollers. There's Flanagan's
Nell getting it now,” added Norah as the cries and entreaties of another
child were heard. She drew herself up and listened, a slight shade of
concern drifting across her face.

A long, agonizing wail shivered through the air.

“Nell's Sick, and can't do her work.” The woman rose as she spoke. “I
saw her goin' off to-day, and told Flanagan she'd better keep her at
home.”

Saying this, Norah went out quickly, Pinky following. With head erect
and mouth set firmly, the queen strode across the street and a little
way down the pavement, to the entrance of a cellar, from which the cries
and sounds of whipping came. Down the five or six rotten and broken
steps she plunged, Pinky close after her.

“Stop!” shouted Norah, in a tone of command.

Instantly the blows ceased, and the cries were hushed.

“You'll be hanged for murder if you don't take care,” said Norah.
“What's Nell been doin'?”

“Doin', the slut!” ejaculated the woman, a short, bloated, revolting
creature, with scarcely anything human in her face. “Doin', did ye say?
It's nothin' she's been doin', the lazy, trapsing huzzy! Who's that
intrudin' herself in here?” she added fiercely, as she saw Pinky, making
at the same time a movement toward the girl. “Get out o' here, or I'll
spile y'r pictur'!”

“Keep quiet, will you?” said Norah, putting her hand on the woman and
pushing her back as easily as if she had been a child. “Now come here,
Nell, and let me look at you.”

Out of the far corner of the cellar into which Flanagan had thrown her
when she heard Norah's voice, and into the small circle of light made
by a single tallow candle, there crept slowly the figure of a child
literally clothed in rags. Norah reached out her hand to her as she came
up--there was a scared look on her pinched face--and drew her close to
the light.

“Gracious! your hand's like an ice-ball!” exclaimed Norah.

Pinky looked at the child, and grew faint at heart. She had large hazel
eyes, that gleamed with a singular lustre out of the suffering, grimed
and wasted little face, so pale and sad and pitiful that the sight of it
was enough to draw tears from any but the brutal and hardened.

“Are you sick?” asked Norah.

“No, she's not sick; she's only shamming,” growled Flanagan.

“You shut up!” retorted Norah. “I wasn't speaking to you.” Then she
repeated her question:

“Are you sick, Nell?”

“Yes.”

“Where?”

“I don't know.”

Norah laid her hand on the child's head:

“Does it hurt here?”

“Oh yes! It hurts so I can't see good,” answered Nell.

“It's all a lie! I know her; she's shamming.”

“Oh no, Norah!” cried the child, a sudden hope blending with the fear in
her voice. “I ain't shamming at all. I fell down ever so many times in
the street, and 'most got run over. Oh dear! oh dear!” and she clung to
the woman with a gesture of despair piteous to see.

“I don't believe you are, Nell,” said Norah, kindly. Then, to the woman,
“Now mind, Flanagan, Nell's sick; d'ye hear?”

The woman only uttered a defiant growl.

“She's not to be licked again to-night.” Norah spoke as one having
authority.

“I wish ye'd be mindin' y'r own business, and not come interfarin' wid
me. She's my gal, and I've a right to lick her if I plaze.”

“Maybe she is and maybe she isn't,” retorted Norah.

“Who says she isn't my gal?” screamed the woman, firing up at this and
reaching out for Nell, who shrunk closer to Norah.

“Maybe she is and maybe she isn't,” said the queen, quietly repeating
her last sentence; “and I think maybe she isn't. So take care and mind
what I say. Nell isn't to be licked any more to-night.”

“Oh, Norah,” sobbed the child, in a husky, choking voice, “take me,
won't you? She'll pinch me, and she'll hit my head on the wall, and
she'll choke me and knock me. Oh, Norah, Norah!”

Pinky could stand this no longer. Catching up the bundle of rags in
her arms, she sprang out of the cellar and ran across the street to the
queen's house, Norah and Flanagan coming quickly after her. At the
door, through which Pinky had passed, Norah paused, and turning to the
infuriated Irish woman, said, sternly,

“Go back! I won't have you in here; and if you make a row, I'll tell
John to lock you up.”

“I want my Nell,” said the woman, her manner changing. There was a shade
of alarm in her voice.

“You can't have her to-night; so that's settled. And if there's any row,
you'll be locked up.” Saying which, Norah went in and shut the door,
leaving Flanagan on the outside.

The bundle of dirty rags with the wasted body of a child inside, the
body scarcely heavier than the rags, was laid by Pinky in the corner
of a settee, and the unsightly mass shrunk together like something
inanimate.

“I thought you'd had enough with old Sal,” said Norah, in a tone of
reproof, as she came in.

“Couldn't help it,” replied Pinky. “I'm bad enough, but I can't stand to
see a child abused like that--no, not if I die for it.”

Norah crossed to the settee and spoke to Nell. But there was no answer,
nor did the bundle of rags stir.

“Nell! Nell!” She called to deaf ears. Then she put her hand on the
child and raised one of the arms. It dropped away limp as a withered
stalk, showing the ashen white face across which it had lain.

The two women manifested no excitement. The child had fainted or was
dead--which, they did not know. Norah straightened out the wasted little
form and turned up the face. The eyes were shut, the mouth closed, the
pinched features rigid, as if still giving expression to pain, but there
was no mistaking the sign that life had gone out of them. It might be
for a brief season, it might be for ever.

A little water was thrown into the child's face. Its only effect was to
streak the grimy skin.

“Poor little thing!” said Pinky. “I hope she's dead.”

“They're tough. They don't die easy,” returned Norah.

“She isn't one of the tough kind.”

“Maybe not. They say Flanagan stole her when she was a little thing,
just toddling.”

“Don't let's do anything to try to bring her to,” said Pinky.

Norah stood for some moment's with an irresolute air, then bent over the
child and examined her more carefully. She could feel no pulse beat, nor
any motion of the heart,

“I don't want the coroner here,” she said, in a tone of annoyance. “Take
her back to Flanagan; it's her work, and she must stand by it.”

“Is she really dead?” asked Pinky.

“Looks like it, and serves Flanagan right. I've told her over and over
that Nell wouldn't stand it long if she didn't ease up a little. Flesh
isn't iron.”

Again she examined the child carefully, but without the slightest sign
of feeling.

“It's all the same now who has her,” she said, turning off from the
settee. “Take her back to Flanagan.”

But Pinky would not touch the child, nor could threat or persuasion
lead her to do so. While they were contending, Flanagan, who had fired
herself up with half a pint of whisky, came storming through the door in
a blind rage and screaming out,

“Where's my Nell? I want my Nell!”

Catching sight of the child's inanimate form lying on the settee, she
pounced down upon it like some foul bird and bore it off, cursing and
striking the senseless clay in her insane fury.

Pinky, horrified at the dreadful sight, and not sure that the child was
really dead, and so insensible to pain, made a movement to follow, but
Norah caught her arm with a tight grip and held her back.

“Are you a fool?” said the queen, sternly. “Let Flanagan alone. Nell's
out of her reach, and I'm glad of it.”

“If I was only sure!” exclaimed Pinky.

“You may be. I know death--I've seen it often enough. They'll have the
coroner over there in the morning. It's Flanagan's concern, not yours or
mine, so keep out of it if you know when you're well off.”

“I'll appear against her at the inquest,” said Pinky.

“You'll do no such thing. Keep your tongue behind your teeth. It's time
enough to show it when it's pulled out. Take my advice, and mind your
own business. You'll have enough to do caring for your own head, without
looking after other people's.”

“I'm not one of that kind,” answered Pinky, a little tartly; “and if
there's any way to keep Flanagan from murdering another child, I'm going
to find it out.”

“You'll find out something else first,” said Norah, with a slight curl
of her lip.

“What?”

“The way to prison.”

“Pshaw! I'm not afraid.”

“You'd better be. If you appear against Flanagan, she'll have you caged
before to-morrow night.”

“How can she do it?”

“Swear against you before an alderman, and he'll send you down if it's
only to get his fee. She knows her man.”

“Suppose murder is proved against her?”

“Suppose!” Norah gave a little derisive laugh.

“They don't look after things in here as they do outside. Everybody's
got the screws on, and things must break sometimes, but it isn't called
murder. The coroner understands it all. He's used to seeing things
break.”




CHAPTER VII.



_FOR_ a short time the sounds of cruel exultation came over from
Flanagan's; then all was still.

“Sal's put her mark on you,” said Norah, looking steadily into Pinky's
face, and laughing in a cold, half-amused way.

Pinky raised her hand to her swollen cheek. “Does it look very bad?” she
asked.

“Spoils your beauty some.”

“Will it get black?”

“Shouldn't wonder. But what can't be helped, can't. You'll mind your own
business next time, and keep out of Sal's way. She's dangerous. What's
the matter?”

“Got a sort of chill,” replied the girl, who from nervous reaction was
beginning to shiver.

“Oh, want something to warm you up.” Norah brought out a bottle of
spirits. Pinky poured a glass nearly half full, added some water, and
then drank off the fiery mixture.

“None of your common stuff,” said Norah, with a smile, as Pinky smacked
her lips. The girl drew her handkerchief from her pocket, and as she did
so a piece of paper dropped on the floor.

“Oh, there it is!” she exclaimed, light flashing into her face. “Going
to make a splendid hit. Just look at them rows.”

Norah threw an indifferent glance on the paper.

“They're lucky, every one of them,” said Pinky. “Going to put half a
dollar on each row--sure to make a hit.”

The queen gave one of her peculiar shrugs.

“Going to break Sam McFaddon,” continued Pinky, her spirits rising under
the influence of Norah's treat.

“Soft heads don't often break hard rocks,” returned the woman, with a
covert sneer.

“That's an insult!” cried Pinky, on whom the liquor she had just taken
was beginning to have a marked effect, “and I won't stand an insult from
you or anybody else.”

“Well, I wouldn't if I was you,” returned Norah, coolly. A hard
expression began settling about her mouth.

“And I don't mean to. I'm as good as you are, any day!”

“You may be a great deal better, for all I care,” answered Norah. “Only
take my advice, and keep a civil tongue in your head.” There was a
threatening undertone in the woman's voice. She drew her tall person
more erect, and shook herself like a wild beast aroused from inaction.

Pinky was too blind to see the change that had come so suddenly. A
stinging retort fell from her lips. But the words had scarcely died on
the air ere she found herself in the grip of vice-like hands. Resistance
was of no more avail than if she had been a child. In what seemed but a
moment of time she was pushed back through the door and dropped upon the
pavement. Then the door shut, and she was alone on the outside--no,
not alone, for scores of the denizens who huddle together in that foul
region were abroad, and gathered around her as quickly as flies about
a heap of offal, curious, insolent and aggressive. As she arose to her
feet she found herself hemmed in by a jeering crowd.

“Ho! it's Pinky Swett!” cried a girl, pressing toward her. “Hi, Pinky!
what's the matter? What's up?”

“Norah pitched her out! I saw it!” screamed a boy, one of the young
thieves that harbored in the quarter.

“It's a lie!” Pinky answered back as she confronted the crowd.

At this moment another boy, who had come up behind Pinky, gave her dress
so violent a jerk that she fell over backward on the pavement, striking
her head on a stone and cutting it badly. She lay there, unable to rise,
the crowd laughing with as much enjoyment as if witnessing a dog-fight.

“Give her a dose of mud!” shouted one of the boys; and almost as soon
as the words were out of his mouth her face was covered with a paste of
filthy dirt from the gutter. This, instead of exciting pity, only gave
a keener zest to the show. The street rang with shouts and peals of
merriment, bringing a new and larger crowd to see the fun. With them
came one or two policemen.

Seeing that it was only a drunken woman, they pushed back the crowd and
raised her to her feet. As they did so the blood streamed from the back
of her head and stained her dress to the waist. She was taken to the
nearest station-house.

At eleven o'clock on the next morning, punctual to the minute, came Mrs.
Dinneford to the little third-story room in which she had met Mrs. Bray.
She repeated her rap at the door before it was opened, and noticed that
a key was turned in the lock.

“You have seen the woman?” she said as she took an offered seat, coming
at once to the object of her visit.

“Yes.”

“Well?”

“I gave her the money.”

“Well?”

Mrs. Bray shook her head:

“Afraid I can't do much with her.”

“Why?” an anxious expression coming into Mrs. Dinneford's face.

“These people suspect everybody; there is no honor nor truth in them,
and they judge every one by themselves. She half accused me of getting a
larger amount of money from you, and putting her off with the paltry sum
of thirty dollars.”

Mrs. Bray looked exceedingly hurt and annoyed.

“Threatened,” she went on, “to go to you herself--didn't want any
go-betweens nor brokers. I expected to hear you say that she'd been at
your house this morning.”

“Good Gracious! no!” Mrs. Dinneford's face was almost distorted with
alarm.

“It's the way with all these people,” coolly remarked Mrs. Bray. “You're
never safe with them.”

“Did you hint at her leaving the city?--going to New Orleans, for
instance?”

“Oh dear, no! She isn't to be managed in that way--is deeper and more
set than I thought. The fact is, Mrs. Dinneford”--and Mrs. Bray lowered
her voice and looked shocked and mysterious--“I'm beginning to suspect
her as being connected with a gang.”

“With a gang? What kind of a gang?” Mrs. Dinneford turned slightly pale.

“A gang of thieves. She isn't the right thing; I found that out long
ago. You remember what I said when you gave her the child. I told you
that she was not a good woman, and that it was a cruel thing to put a
helpless, new-born baby into her hands.”

“Never mind about that.” Mrs. Dinneford waved her hand impatiently.
“The baby's out of her hands, so far as that is concerned. A gang of
thieves!”

“Yes, I'm 'most sure of it. Goes to people's houses on one excuse and
another, and finds out where the silver is kept and how to get in. You
don't know half the wickedness that's going on. So you see it's no use
trying to get her away.”

Mrs. Bray was watching the face of her visitor with covert scrutiny,
gauging, as she did so, by its weak alarms, the measure of her power
over her.

“Dreadful! dreadful!” ejaculated Mrs. Dinneford, with dismay.

“It's bad enough,” said Mrs. Bray, “and I don't see the end of it. She's
got you in her power, and no mistake, and she isn't one of the kind to
give up so splendid an advantage. I'm only surprised that she's kept
away so long.”

“What's to be done about it?” asked Mrs. Dinneford, her alarm and
distress increasing.

“Ah! that's more than I can tell,” coolly returned Mrs. Bray. “One thing
is certain--I don't want to have anything more to do with her. It isn't
safe to let her come here. You'll have to manage her yourself.”

“No, no, no, Mrs. Bray! You mustn't desert me!” answered Mrs. Dinneford,
her face growing pallid with fear. “Money is of no account. I'll pay
'most anything, reasonable or unreasonable, to have her kept away.”

And she drew out her pocket-book while speaking. At this moment there
came two distinct raps on the door. It had been locked after Mrs.
Dinneford's entrance. Mrs. Bray started and changed countenance, turning
her face quickly from observation. But she was self-possessed in an
instant. Rising, she said in a whisper,

“Go silently into the next room, and remain perfectly still. I believe
that's the woman now. I'll manage her as best I can.”

Almost as quick as thought, Mrs. Dinneford vanished through a door that
led into an adjoining room, and closing it noiselessly, turned a key
that stood in the lock, then sat down, trembling with nervous alarm. The
room in which she found herself was small, and overlooked the street;
it was scantily furnished as a bed-room. In one corner, partly hid by
a curtain that hung from a hoop fastened to the wall, was an old wooden
chest, such as are used by sailors. Under the bed, and pushed as far
back as possible, was another of the same kind. The air of the room was
close, and she noticed the stale smell of a cigar.

A murmur of voices from the room she had left so hastily soon reached
her ears; but though she listened intently, standing close to the door,
she was not able to distinguish a word. Once or twice she was sure that
she heard the sound of a man's voice. It was nearly a quarter of an
hour by her watch--it seemed two hours--before Mrs. Bray's visitor or
visitors retired; then there came a light rap on the door. She opened
it, and stood face to face again with the dark-eyed little woman.

“You kept me here a long time,” said Mrs. Dinneford, with ill-concealed
impatience.

“No longer than I could help,” replied Mrs. Bray. “Affairs of this kind
are not settled in a minute.”

“Then it was that miserable woman?”

“Yes.”

“Well, what did you make out of her?”

“Not much; she's too greedy. The taste of blood has sharpened her
appetite.”

“What does she want?”

“She wants two hundred dollars paid into her hand to-day, and says that
if the money isn't here by sundown, you'll have a visit from her in less
than an hour afterward.”

“Will that be the end of it?”

A sinister smile curved Mrs. Bray's lips slightly.

“More than I can say,” she answered.

“Two hundred dollars?”

“Yes. She put the amount higher, but I told her she'd better not go for
too big a slice or she might get nothing--that there was such a thing
as setting the police after her. She laughed at this in such a wicked,
sneering way that I felt my flesh creep, and said she knew the police,
and some of their masters, too, and wasn't afraid of them. She's a
dreadful woman;” and Mrs. Bray shivered in a very natural manner.

“If I thought this would be the last of it!” said Mrs. Dinneford as she
moved about the room in a disturbed way, and with an anxious look on her
face.

“Perhaps,” suggested her companion, “it would be best for you to grapple
with this thing at the outset--to take our vampire by the throat and
strangle her at once. The knife is the only remedy for some forms of
disease. If left to grow and prey upon the body, they gradually suck
away its life and destroy it in the end.”

“If I only knew how to do it,” replied Mrs. Dinneford. “If I could only
get her in my power, I'd make short works of her.” Her eyes flashed with
a cruel light.

“It might be done.”

“How?”

“Mr. Dinneford knows the chief of police.”

The light went out of Mrs. Dinneford's eyes:

“It can't be done in that way, and you know it as well as I do.”

Mrs. Dinneford turned upon Mrs. Bray sharply, and with a gleam of
suspicion in her face.

“I don't know any other way, unless you go to the chief yourself,”
 replied Mrs. Bray, coolly. “There is no protection in cases like this
except through the law. Without police interference, you are wholly in
this woman's power.”

Mrs. Dinneford grew very pale.

“It is always dangerous,” went on Mrs. Bray, “to have anything to do
with people of this class. A woman who for hire will take a new-born
baby and sell it to a beggar-woman will not stop at anything. It is very
unfortunate that you are mixed up with her.”

“I'm indebted to you for the trouble,” replied. Mrs. Dinneford, with
considerable asperity of manner. “You ought to have known something
about the woman before employing her in a delicate affair of this kind.”

“Saints don't hire themselves to put away new-born babies,” retorted
Mrs. Bray, with an ugly gurgle in her throat. “I told you at the time
that she was a bad woman, and have not forgotten your answer.”

“What did I answer?”

“That she might be the devil for all you cared!”

“You are mistaken.”

“No; I repeat your very words. They surprised and shocked me at the
time, and I have not forgotten them. People who deal with the devil
usually have the devil to pay; and your case, it seems, is not to be an
exception.”

Mrs. Bray had assumed an air of entire equality with her visitor.

A long silence followed, during which Mrs. Dinneford walked the floor
with the quick, restless motions of a caged animal.

“How long do you think two hundred dollars will satisfy her?” she asked,
at length, pausing and turning to her companion.

“It is impossible for me to say,” was answered; “not long, unless you
can manage to frighten her off; you must threaten hard.”

Another silence followed.

“I did not expect to be called on for so large a sum,” Mrs. Dinneford
said at length, in a husky voice, taking out her pocket-book as she
spoke. “I have only a hundred dollars with me. Give her that, and put
her off until to-morrow.”

“I will do the best I can with her,” replied Mrs. Bray, reaching out her
hand for the money, “but I think it will be safer for you to let me have
the balance to-day. She will, most likely, take it into her head that
I have received the whole sum from you, and think I am trying to cheat
her. In that case she will be as good as her word, and come down on
you.”

“Mrs. Bray!” exclaimed Mrs. Dinneford, suspicion blazing from her eyes.
“Mrs. Bray!”--and she turned upon her and caught her by the arms with
a fierce grip--“as I live, you are deceiving me. There is no woman but
yourself. You are the vampire!”

She held the unresisting little woman in her vigorous grasp for some
moments, gazing at her in stern and angry accusation.

Mrs. Bray stood very quit and with scarcely a change of countenance
until this outburst of passion had subsided. She was still holding the
money she had taken from Mrs. Dinneford. As the latter released her she
extended her hand, saying, in a low resolute voice, in which not the
faintest thrill of anger could be detected,

“Take your money.” She waited for a moment, and then let the little roll
of bank-bills fall at Mrs. Dinneford's feet and turned away.

Mrs. Dinneford had made a mistake, and she saw it--saw that she was
now more than ever in the power of this woman, whether she was true or
false. If false, more fatally in her power.

At this dead-lock in the interview between these women there came a
diversion. The sound of feet was heard on the stairs, then a hurrying
along the narrow passage; a hand was on the door, but the key had been
prudently turned on the inside.

With a quick motion, Mrs. Bray waved her hand toward the adjoining
chamber. Mrs. Dinneford did not hesitate, but glided in noiselessly,
shutting and locking the door behind her.

“Pinky Swett!” exclaimed Mrs. Bray, in a low voice, putting her finger
to her lips, as she admitted her visitor, at the same time giving a
warning glance toward the other room. Eyeing her from head to foot, she
added, “Well, you are an object!”

Pinky had drawn aside a close veil, exhibiting a bruised and swollen
face. A dark band lay under one of her eyes, and there was a cut with
red, angry margins on the cheek.

“You are an object,” repeated Mrs. Bray as Pinky moved forward into the
room.

“Well, I am, and no mistake,” answered Pinky, with a light laugh. She
had been drinking enough to overcome the depression and discomfort of
her feelings consequent on the hard usage she had received and a night
in one of the city station-houses. “Who's in there?”

Mrs. Bray's finger went again to her lips. “No matter,” was replied.
“You must go away until the coast is clear. Come back in half an hour.”

And she hurried Pinky out of the door, locking it as the girl retired.
When Mrs. Dinneford came out of the room into which he had gone so
hastily, the roll of bank-notes still lay upon the floor. Mrs. Bray had
prudently slipped them into her pocket before admitting Pinky, but as
soon as she was alone had thrown them down again.

The face of Mrs. Dinneford was pale, and exhibited no ordinary signs of
discomfiture and anxiety.

“Who was that?” she asked.

“A friend,” replied Mrs. Bray, in a cold, self-possessed manner.

A few moments of embarrassed silence followed. Mrs. Bray crossed the
room, touching with her foot the bank-bills, as if they were of no
account to her.

“I am half beside myself,” said Mrs. Dinneford.

Mrs. Bray made no response, did not even turn toward her visitor.

“I spoke hastily.”

“A vampire!” Mrs. Bray swept round upon her fiercely. “A blood-sucker!”
 and she ground her teeth in well-feigned passion.

Mrs. Dinneford sat down trembling.

“Take your money and go,” said Mrs. Bray, and she lifted the bills from
the floor and tossed them into her visitor's lap. “I am served right. It
was evil work, and good never comes of evil.”

But Mrs. Dinneford did not stir. To go away at enmity with this woman
was, so far as she could see, to meet exposure and unutterable disgrace.
Anything but that.

“I shall leave this money, trusting still to your good offices,” she
said, at length, rising. Her manner was much subdued. “I spoke hastily,
in a sort of blind desperation. We should not weigh too carefully the
words that are extorted by pain or fear. In less than an hour I will
send you a hundred dollars more.”

Mrs. Dinneford laid the bank-bills on a table, and then moved to the
door, but she dared not leave in this uncertainty. Looking back, she
said, with an appealing humility of voice and manner foreign to her
character,

“Let us be friends still, Mrs. Bray; we shall gain nothing by being
enemies. I can serve you, and you can serve me. My suspicions were ill
founded. I felt wild and desperate, and hardly knew what I was saying.”

She stood anxiously regarding the little dark-eyed woman, who did not
respond by word or movement.

Taking her hand from the door she was about opening, Mrs. Dinneford came
back into the room, and stood close to Mrs. Bray:

“Shall I send you the money?”

“You can do as you please,” was replied, with chilling indifference.

“Are you implacable?”

“I am not used to suspicion, much less denunciation and assault. A
vampire! Do you know what that means?”

“It meant, as used by me, only madness. I did not know what I was
saying. It was a cry of pain--nothing more. Consider how I stand, how
much I have at stake, in what a wretched affair I have become involved.
It is all new to me, and I am bewildered and at fault. Do not desert me
in this crisis. I must have some one to stand between me and this woman;
and if you step aside, to whom can I go?”

Mrs. Bray relented just a little. Mrs. Dinneford pleaded and humiliated
herself, and drifted farther into the toils of her confederate.

“You are not rich, Mrs. Bray,” she said, at parting, “independent in
spirit as you are. I shall add a hundred dollars for your own use; and
if ever you stand in need, you will know where to find an unfailing
friend.”

Mrs. Bray put up her hands, and replied, “No, no, no; don't think of
such a thing. I am not mercenary. I never serve a friend for money.”

But Mrs. Dinneford heard the “yes” which flushed into the voice that
said “no.” She was not deceived.

A rapid change passed over Mrs. Bray on the instant her visitor left the
room. Her first act was to lock the door; her next, to take the roll of
bank-bills from the table and put it into her pocket. Over her face a
gleam of evil satisfaction had swept.

“Got you all right now, my lady!” fell with a chuckle from her lips. “A
vampire, ha!” The chuckle was changed for a kind of hiss. “Well, have it
so. There is rich blood in your veins, and it will be no fault of mine
if I do not fatten upon it. As for pity, you shall have as much of it
as you gave to that helpless baby. Saints don't work in this kind of
business, and I'm not a saint.”

And she chuckled and hissed and muttered to herself, with many signs of
evil satisfaction.




CHAPTER VIII.



_FOR_ an hour Mrs. Bray waited the reappearance of Pinky Swett, but the
girl did not come back. At the end of this time a package which had been
left at the door was brought to her room. It came from Mrs. Dinneford,
and contained two hundred dollars. A note that accompanied the package
read as follows:

“Forgive my little fault of temper. It is your interest to be my friend.
The woman must not, on any account, be suffered to come near me.”

Of course there was no signature. Mrs. Bray's countenance was radiant as
she fingered the money.

“Good luck for me, but bad for the baby,” she said, in a low, pleased
murmur, talking to herself. “Poor baby! I must see better to its
comfort. It deserves to be looked after. I wonder why Pinky doesn't
come?”

Mrs. Bray listened, but no sound of feet from the stairs or entries, no
opening or shutting of doors, broke the silence that reigned through the
house.

“Pinky's getting too low down--drinks too much; can't count on her any
more.” Mrs. Bray went on talking to herself. “No rest; no quiet; never
satisfied; for ever knocking round, and for ever getting the worst
of it. She was a real nice girl once, and I always liked her. But she
doesn't take any care of herself.”

As Pinky went out, an hour before, she met a fresh-looking girl, not
over seventeen, and evidently from the country. She was standing on the
pavement, not far from the house in which Mrs. Bray lived, and had
a traveling-bag in her hand. Her perplexed face and uncertain manner
attracted Pinky's attention.

“Are you looking for anybody?” she asked.

“I'm trying to find a Mrs. Bray,” the girl answered. “I'm a stranger
from the country.”

“Oh, you are?” said Pinky, drawing her veil more tightly so that her
disfigured face could not be seen.

“Yes I'm from L----.”

“Indeed? I used to know some people there.”

“Then you've been in L----?” said the girl, with a pleased, trustful
manner, as of one who had met a friend at the right time.

“Yes, I've visited there.”

“Indeed? Who did you know in L----?”

“Are you acquainted with the Cartwrights?”

“I know of them. They are among our first people,” returned the girl.

“I spent a week in their family a few years ago, and had a very pleasant
time,” said Pinky.

“Oh, I'm glad to know that,” remarked the girl. “I'm a stranger here;
and if I can't find Mrs. Bray, I don't see what I am to do. A lady from
here who was staying at the hotel gave me at letter to Mrs. Bray. I was
living at the hotel, but I didn't like it; it was too public. I told the
lady that I wanted to learn a trade or get into a store, and she said
the city was just the place for me, and that she would give me a letter
to a particular friend, who would, on her recommendation, interest he
self for me. It's somewhere along here that she lived, I'm sure;” and
she took a letter from her pocket and examined the direction.

The girl was fresh and young and pretty, and had an artless, confiding
manner. It was plain she knew little of the world, and nothing of its
evils and dangers.

“Let me see;” and Pinky reached out her hand for the letter. She put it
under her veil, and read,

“MRS. FANNY BRAY, “No. 631----street, “----

“By the hand of Miss Flora Bond.”

“Flora Bond,” said Pinky, in a kind, familiar tone.

“Yes, that is my name,” replied the girl; “isn't this----street?”

“Yes; and there, is the number you are looking for.”

“Oh, thank you! I'm so glad to find the place. I was beginning to feel
scared.”

“I will ring the bell for you,” said Pinky, going to the door of No.
631. A servant answered the summons.

“Is Mrs. Bray at home?” inquired Pinky.

“I don't know,” replied the servant, looking annoyed. “Her rooms are in
the third story;” and she held the door wide open for them to enter. As
they passed into the hall Pinky said to her companion,

“Just wait here a moment, and I will run up stairs and see if she is
in.”

The girl stood in the hall until Pinky came back.

“Not at home, I'm sorry to say.”

“Oh dear! that's bad; what shall I do?” and the girl looked distressed.

“She'll be back soon, no doubt,” said Pinky, in a light, assuring voice.
“I'll go around with you a little and see things.”

The girl looked down at her traveling-bag.

“Oh, that's nothing; I'll help you to carry it;” and Pinky took it from
her hand.

“Couldn't we leave it here?” asked Flora.

“It might not be safe; servants are not always to be trusted, and
Mrs. Bray's rooms are locked; we can easily carry it between us. I'm
strong--got good country blood in my veins. You see I'm from the country
as well as you; right glad we met. Don't know what you would have done.”

And she drew the girl out, talking familiarly, as they went.

“Haven't had your dinner yet?”

“No; just arrived in the cars, and came right here.”

“You must have something to eat, then. I know a nice place; often get
dinner there when I'm out.”

The girl did not feel wholly at ease. She had not yet been able to get
sight of Pinky's closely-veiled features, and there was something in her
voice that made her feel uncomfortable.

“I don't care for any dinner,” she said; “I'm not hungry.”

“Well, I am, then, so come. Do you like oysters?”

“Yes.”

“Cook them splendidly. Best place in the city. And you'd like to get
into a store or learn a trade?”

“Yes.”

“What trade did you think of?”

“None in particular.”

“How would you like to get into a book-bindery? I know two or three
girls in binderies, and they can make from five to ten dollars a week.
It's the nicest, cleanest work I know of.”

“Oh, do you?” returned Flora, with newly-awakening interest.

“Yes; we'll talk it all over while we're eating dinner. This way.”

And Pinky turned the corner of a small street that led away from the
more crowded thoroughfare along which they had been passing.

“It's a quiet and retired place, where only the nicest kind of people
go,” she added. “Many working-girls and girls in stores get their
dinners there. We'll meet some of them, no doubt; and if any that I know
should happen in, we might hear of a good place. Just the thing, isn't
it? I'm right glad I met you.”

They had gone halfway down the square, when Pinky stopped before the
shop of a confectioner. In the window was a display of cakes, pies and
candies, and a sign with the words, “LADIES' RESTAURANT.”

“This is the place,” she said, and opening the door, passed in, the
young stranger following.

A sign of caution, unseen by Flora, was made to a girl who stood behind
the counter. Then Pinky turned, saying,

“How will you have your oysters? stewed, fried, broiled or roasted?”

“I'm not particular--any way,” replied Flora.

“I like them fried. Will you have them the same way?”

Flora nodded assent.

“Let them be fried, then. Come, we'll go up stairs. Anybody there?”

“Two or three only.”

“Any girls from the bindery?”

“Yes; I think so.”

“Oh. I'm glad of that! Want to see some of them. Come, Miss Bond.”

And Pinky, after a whispered word to the attendant, led the way to a
room up stairs in which were a number of small tables. At one of these
were two girls eating, at another a girl sitting by herself, and at
another a young man and a girl. As Pinky and her companion entered,
the inmates of the room stared at them familiarly, and then winked and
leered at each other. Flora did not observe this, but she felt a sudden
oppression and fear. They sat down at a table not far from one of the
windows. Flora looked for the veil to be removed, so that she might see
the face of her new friend. But Pinky kept it closely down.

In about ten minutes the oysters were served. Accompanying them were two
glasses of some kind of liquor. Floating on one of these was a small bit
of cork. Pinky took this and handed the other to her companion, saying,

“Only a weak sangaree. It will refresh you after your fatigue; and I
always like something with oysters, it helps to make them lay lighter on
the stomach.”

Meantime, one of the girls had crossed over and spoken to Pinky. After
word or two, the latter said,

“Don't you work in a bindery, Miss Peter?”

“Yes,” was answered, without hesitation.

“I thought so. Let me introduce you to my friend, Miss Flora Bond. She's
from the country, and wants to get into some good establishment. She
talked about a store, but I think a bindery is better.”

“A great deal better,” was replied by Miss Peter. “I've tried them both,
and wouldn't go back to a store again on any account. If I can serve
your friend, I shall be most happy.”

“Thank you!” returned Flora; “you are very kind.”

“Not at all; I'm always glad when I can be of service to any one. You
think you'd like to go into a bindery?”

“Yes. I've come to the city to get employment, and haven't much choice.”

“There's no place like the city,” remarked the other. “I'd die in the
country--nothing going on. But you won't stagnate here. When did you
arrive?”

“To-day.”

“Have you friends here?”

“No. I brought a letter of introduction to a lady who resides in the
city.”

“What's her name?”

“Mrs. Bray.”

Miss Peter turned her head so that Flora could not see her face. It was
plain from its expression that she knew Mrs. Bray.

“Have you seen her yet?” she asked.

“No. She was out when I called. I'm going back in a little while.”

The girl sat down, and went on talking while the others were eating.
Pinky had emptied her glass of sangaree before she was half through with
her oysters, and kept urging Flora to drink.

“Don't be afraid of it, dear,” she said, in a kind, persuasive way;
“there's hardly a thimbleful of wine in the whole glass. It will soothe
your nerves, and make you feel ever so much better.”

There was something in the taste of the sangaree that Flora did not
like--a flavor that was not of wine. But urged repeatedly by her
companion, whose empty glass gave her encouragement and confidence, she
sipped and drank until she had taken the whole of it. By this time she
was beginning to have a sense of fullness and confusion in the head, and
to feel oppressed and uncomfortable. Her appetite suddenly left her, and
she laid down her knife and fork and leaned her head upon her hand.

“What's the matter?” asked Pinky.

“Nothing,” answered the girl; “only my head feels a little strangely. It
will pass off in a moment.”

“Riding in the cars, maybe,” said Pinky. “I always feel bad after being
in the cars; it kind of stirs me up.”

Flora sat very quietly at the table, still resting her head upon
her hands. Pinky and the girl who had joined them exchanged looks of
intelligence. The former had drawn her veil partly aside, yet concealing
as much as possible the bruises on her face.

“My! but you're battered!” exclaimed Miss Peter, in a whisper that was
unheard by Flora.

Pinky only answered by a grimace. Then she said to Flora, with
well-affected concern,

“I'm afraid you are ill, dear? How do you feel?”

“I don't know,” answered the poor girl, in a voice that betrayed great
anxiety, if not alarm. “It came over me all at once. I'm afraid that
wine was too strong; I am not used to taking anything.”

“Oh dear, no! it wasn't that. I drank a glass, and don't feel it any
more than if it had been water.”

“Let's go,” said Flora, starting up. “Mrs. Bray must be home by this
time.”

“All right, if you feel well enough,” returned Pinky, rising at the same
time.

“Oh dear! how my head swims!” exclaimed Flora, putting both hands to
her temples. She stood for a few moments in an uncertain attitude, then
reached out in a blind, eager way.

Pinky drew quickly to her side, and put one arm about her waist.

“Come,” she said, “the air is too close for you here;” and with the
assistance of the girl who had joined them, she steadied Flora down
stairs.

“Doctored a little too high,” whispered Miss Peter, with her mouth close
to Pinky's ear.

“All right,” Pinky whispered back; “they know how to do it.”

At the foot of the stairs Pinky said,

“You take her out through the yard, while I pay for the oysters. I'll be
with you in a moment.”

Poor Flora, was already too much confused by the drugged liquor she had
taken to know what they were doing with her.

Hastily paying for the oysters and liquor, Pinky was on hand in a few
moments. From the back door of the house they entered a small yard, and
passed from this through a gate into a narrow private alley shut in on
each side by a high fence. This alley ran for a considerable distance,
and had many gates opening into it from yards, hovels and rear
buildings, all of the most forlorn and wretched character. It terminated
in a small street.

Along this alley Pinky and the girl she had met at the restaurant
supported Flora, who was fast losing strength and consciousness. When
halfway down, they held a brief consultation.

“It won't do,” said Pinky, “to take her through to----street. She's too
far gone, and the police will be down on us and carry her off.”

“Norah's got some place in there,” said the other, pointing to an old
wooden building close by.

“I'm out with Norah,” replied Pinky, “and don't mean to have anything
more to do with her.”

“Where's your room?”

“That isn't the go. Don't want her there. Pat Maley's cellar is just
over yonder. We can get in from the alley.”

“Pat's too greedy a devil. There wouldn't be anything left of her when
he got through. No, no, Pinky; I'll have nothing to do with it if she's
to go into Pat Maley's cellar.”

“Not much to choose between 'em,” answered Pinky. “But it won't do to
parley here. We must get her in somewhere.”

And she pushed open a gate as she spoke. It swung back on one hinge
and struck the fence with a bang, disclosing a yard that beggared
description in its disorder and filth. In the back part of this yard
was a one-and-a-half-story frame building, without windows, looking more
like an old chicken-house or pig-stye than a place for human beings
to live in. The loft over the first story was reached by ladder on the
outside. Above and below the hovel was laid off in kind of stalls or
bunks furnished with straw. There were about twenty of these. It was
a ten-cent lodging-house, filled nightly. If this wretched hut or
stye--call it what you will--had been torn down, it would not have
brought ten dollars as kindling-wood. Yet its owner, a gentleman (?)
living handsomely up town, received for it the annual rent of two
hundred and fifty dollars. Subletted at an average of two dollars a
night, it gave an income of nearly seven hundred dollars a year. It was
known as the “Hawk's Nest,” and no bird of prey ever had a fouler nest
than this.

As the gate banged on the fence a coarse, evil-looking man, wearing a
dirty Scotch cap and a red shirt, pushed his head up from the cellar of
the house that fronted on the street.

“What's wanted?” he asked, in a kind of growl, his upper lip twitching
and drawing up at one side in a nervous way, letting his teeth appear.

“We want to get this girl in for a little while,” said Pinky. “We'll
take her away when she comes round. Is anybody in there?” and she
pointed to the hovel.

The man shook his head.

“How much?” asked Pinky.

“Ten cents apiece;” and he held out his hand.

Pinky gave him thirty cents. He took a key from his pocket, and opened
the door that led into the lower room. The stench that came out as the
door swung back was dreadful. But poor Flora Bond was by this time so
relaxed in every muscle, and so dead to outward things, that it was
impossible to get her any farther. So they bore her into this horrible
den, and laid her down in one of the stalls on a bed of loose straw.
Inside, there was nothing but these stalls and straw--not a table or
chair, or any article of furniture. They filled up nearly the entire
room, leaving only a narrow passage between them. The only means of
ventilation was by the door.

As soon as Pinky and her companion in this terrible wickedness were
alone with their victim, they searched her pocket for the key of her
traveling-bag. On finding it, Pinky was going to open it, when the other
said,

“Never mind about that; we can examine her baggage in safer place. Let's
go for the movables.”

And saying this, she fell quickly to work on the person of Flora,
slipping out the ear-rings first, then removing her breast-pin and
finger-rings, while Pinky unbuttoned the new gaiter boots, and drew off
both boots and stockings, leaving upon the damp straw the small, bare
feet, pink and soft almost as a baby's.

It did not take these harpies five minutes to possess themselves of
everything but the poor girl's dress and undergarments. Cloth oversack,
pocket-book, collar, linen cuffs, hat, shoes and stockings--all these
were taken.

“Hallo!” cried the keeper of this foul den as the two girls hurried out
with the traveling-bag and a large bundle sooner than he had expected;
and he came quickly forth from the cellar in which he lived like a cruel
spider and tried to intercept them, but they glided through the gate
and were out of his reach before he could get near. He could follow them
only with obscene invectives and horrible oaths. Well he knew what had
been done--that there had been a robbery in the “Hawk's Nest,” and he
not in to share the booty.

Growling like a savage dog, this wretch, in whom every instinct of
humanity had long since died--this human beast, who looked on innocence
and helplessness as a wolf looks upon a lamb--strode across the yard and
entered the den. Lying in one of the stalls upon the foul, damp straw
he found Flora Bond. Cruel beast that he was, even he felt himself
held back as by an invisible hand, as he looked at the pure face of the
insensible girl. Rarely had his eyes rested on a countenance so full of
innocence. But the wolf has no pity for the lamb, nor the hawk for the
dove. The instinct of his nature quickly asserted itself.

Avarice first. From the face his eyes turned to see what had been left
by the two girls. An angry imprecation fell from his lips when he saw
how little remained for him. But when he lifted Flora's head and unbound
her hair, a gleam of pleasure came info his foul face. It was a full
suit of rich chestnut brown, nearly three feet long, and fell in thick
masses over her breast and shoulders. He caught it up eagerly, drew it
through his great ugly hands, and gloated over it with something of a
miser's pleasure as he counts his gold. Then taking a pair of scissors
from his pocket, he ran them over the girl's head with the quickness and
skill of a barber, cutting close down, that he might not lose even the
sixteenth part of an inch of her rich tresses. An Indian scalping his
victim could not have shown more eagerness. An Indian's wild pleasure
was in his face as he lifted the heavy mass of brown hair and held it
above his head. It was not a trophy--not a sign of conquest and triumph
over an enemy--but simply plunder, and had a market value of fifteen or
twenty dollars.

The dress was next examined; it was new, but not of a costly material.
Removing this, the man went out with his portion of the spoils, and
locked the door, leaving the half-clothed, unconscious girl lying on
the damp, filthy straw, that swarmed with vermin. It was cold as well as
damp, and the chill of a bleak November day began creeping into her warm
blood. But the stupefying draught had been well compounded, and held her
senses locked.

Of what followed we cannot write, and we shiver as we draw a veil over
scenes that should make the heart of all Christendom ache--scenes that
are repeated in thousands of instances year by year in our large cities,
and no hand is stretched forth to succor and no arm to save. Under
the very eyes of the courts and the churches things worse than we have
described--worse than the reader can imagine--are done every day. The
foul dens into which crime goes freely, and into which innocence is
betrayed, are known to the police, and the evil work that is done
is ever before them. From one victim to another their keepers pass
unquestioned, and plunder, debauch, ruin and murder with an impunity
frightful to contemplate. As was said by a distinguished author,
speaking of a kindred social enormity, “There is not a country
throughout the earth on which a state of things like this would not
bring a curse. There is no religion upon earth that it would not deny;
there is no people on earth that it would not put to shame.”

And we are Christians!

No. Of what followed we cannot write. Those who were near the “Hawk's
Nest” heard that evening, soon after nightfall, the single wild,
prolonged cry of a woman. It was so full of terror and despair that even
the hardened ears that heard it felt a sudden pain. But they were used
to such things in that region, and no one took the trouble to learn what
it meant. Even the policeman moving on his beat stood listening for only
a moment, and then passed on.

Next day, in the local columns of a city paper, appeared the following:

“FOUL PLAY.--About eleven o'clock last night the body of a beautiful
young girl, who could not have been over seventeen years of age, was
discovered lying on the pavement in----street. No one knew how she came
there. She was quite dead when found. There was nothing by which she
could be identified. All her clothes but a single undergarment had been
removed, and her hair cut off close to her head. There were marks of
brutal violence on her person. The body was placed in charge of the
coroner, who will investigate the matter.”

On the day after, this paragraph appeared:

“SUSPICION OF FOUL PLAY.--The coroner's inquest elicited nothing in
regard to the young girl mentioned yesterday as having been found dead
and stripped of her clothing in----street. No one was able to identify
her. A foul deed at which the heart shudders has been done; but the
wretches by whom it was committed have been able to cover their tracks.”

And that was the last of it. The whole nation gives a shudder of fear at
the announcement of an Indian massacre and outrage. But in all our large
cities are savages more cruel and brutal in their instincts than the
Comanches, and they torture and outrage and murder a hundred poor
victims for every one that is exposed to Indian brutality, and there
comes no succor. Is it from ignorance of the fact? No, no, no! There is
not a Judge on the bench, not a lawyer at the bar, not a legislator at
the State capital, not a mayor or police-officer, not a minister who
preaches the gospel of Christ, who came to seek and to save, not an
intelligent citizen, but knows of all this.

What then? Who is responsible? The whole nation arouses itself at news
of an Indian assault upon some defenseless frontier settlement, and the
general government sends troops to succor and to punish. But who takes
note of the worse than Indian massacres going on daily and nightly in
the heart of our great cities? Who hunts down and punishes the human
wolves in our midst whose mouths are red with the blood of innocence?
Their deeds of cruelty outnumber every year a hundred--nay, a
thousand--fold the deeds of our red savages. Their haunts are known, and
their work is known. They lie in wait for the unwary, they gather in the
price of human souls, none hindering, at our very church doors. Is no
one responsible for all this? Is there no help? Is evil stronger than
good, hell stronger than heaven? Have the churches nothing to do in this
matter? Christ came to seek and to save that which was lost--came to
the lowliest, the poorest and the vilest, to those over whom devils had
gained power, and cast out the devils. Are those who call themselves
by his name diligent in the work to which he put his blessed hands?
Millions of dollars go yearly into magnificent churches, but how
little to the work of saving and succoring the weak, the helpless, the
betrayed, the outcast and the dying, who lie uncared for at the mercy
of human fiends, and often so near to the temples of God that their
agonized appeals for help are drowned by the organ and choir!




CHAPTER IX.



_THE_ two girls, on leaving the “Hawk's Nest” with their plunder, did
not pass from the narrow private alley into the small street at its
termination, but hurried along the way they had come, and re-entered the
restaurant by means of the gate opening into the yard. Through the back
door they gained a small, dark room, from which a narrow stairway led
to the second and third stories of the rear building. They seemed to be
entirely familiar with the place.

On reaching the third story, Pinky gave two quick raps and then a single
rap on a closed door. No movement being heard within, she rapped again,
reversing the order--that is, giving one distinct rap, and then two in
quick succession. At this the door came slowly open, and the two girls
passed in with their bundle of clothing and the traveling-bag.

The occupant of this room was a small, thin, well-dressed man,
with cold, restless gray eyes and the air of one who was alert and
suspicious. His hair was streaked with gray, as were also his full beard
and moustache. A diamond pin of considerable value was in his shirt
bosom. The room contained but few articles. There was a worn and faded
carpet on the floor, a writing-table and two or three chairs, and
a small bookcase with a few books, but no evidence whatever of
business--not a box or bundle or article of merchandise was to be seen.

As the two girls entered he, shut the door noiselessly, and turned the
key inside. Then his manner changed; his eyes lighted, and there was an
expression of interest in his face. He looked toward the bag and bundle.

Pinky sat down upon the floor and hurriedly unlocked the traveling-bag.
Thrusting in her hand, she drew out first a muslin nightgown and threw
it down, then a light shawl, a new barege dress, a pair of slippers,
collars, cuffs, ribbons and a variety of underclothing, and last of all
a small Bible and a prayer-book. These latter she tossed from her with a
low derisive laugh, which was echoed by her companion, Miss Peter.

The bundle was next opened, and the cloth sacque, the hat, the boots
and stockings and the collar and cuffs thrown upon the floor with the
contents of the bag.

“How much?” asked Pinky, glancing up at the man.

They were the first words that had been spoken. At this the man knit
his brows in an earnest way, and looked business. He lifted each article
from the floor, examined it carefully and seemed to be making a close
estimate of its value. The traveling-bag was new, and had cost probably
five dollars. The cloth sacque could not have been made for less than
twelve dollars. A fair valuation of the whole would have been near forty
dollars.

“How much?” repeated Pinky, an impatient quiver in her voice.

“Six dollars,” replied the man.

“Six devils!” exclaimed Pinky, in a loud, angry voice.

“Six devils! you old swindler!” chimed in Miss Peter.

“You can take them away. Just as you like,” returned the man, with cool
indifference. “Perhaps the police will give you more. It's the best I
can do.”

“But see here, Jerkin,” said Pinky: “that sacque is worth twice the
money.”

“Not to me. I haven't a store up town. I can't offer it for sale in the
open market. Don't you understand?”

“Say ten dollars.”

“Six.”

“Here's a breast-pin and a pair of ear-rings,” said Miss Peter; “we'll
throw them in;” and she handed Jerkin, as he was called, the bits of
jewelry she had taken from the person of Flora Bond. He looked at them
almost contemptuously as he replied,

“Wouldn't give you a dollar for the set.”

“Say eight dollars for the whole,” urged Pinky.

“Six fifty, and not a cent more,” answered Jerkin.

“Hand over, then, you old cormorant!” returned the girl, fretfully.
“It's a shame to swindle us in this way.”

The man took out his pocket-book and paid the money, giving half to each
of the girls.

“It's just a swindle!” repeated Pinky. “You're an old hard-fisted
money-grubber, and no better than a robber. Three dollars and a quarter
for all that work! It doesn't pay for the trouble. We ought to have had
ten apiece.”

“You can make it ten or twenty, or maybe a hundred, if you will,” said
Jerkin, with a knowing twinkle in his eyes. He gave his thumb a little
movement over his shoulder as he spoke.

“That's so!” exclaimed Pinky, her manner undergoing a change, and her
face growing bright--at least as much of it as could brighten. “Look
here, Nell,” speaking to Miss Peter, and drawing a piece of paper from
her pocket, “I've got ten rows here. Fanny Bray gave me five dollars to
go a half on each row. Meant to have gone to Sam McFaddon's last night,
but got into a muss with old Sal and Norah, and was locked up.”

“They make ten hits up there to one at Sam McFaddon's,” said Jerkin,
again twitching his thumb over his shoulder. “It's the luckiest office I
ever heard of. Two or three hits every day for a week past--got a lucky
streak, somehow. If you go in anywhere, take my advice and go in there,”
 lifting his hand and twitching his thumb upward and over his shoulder
again.

The two girls passed from the room, and the door was shut and locked
inside. No sooner had they done so than Jerkin made a new examination of
the articles, and after satisfying himself as to their value proceeded
to put them out of sight. Lifting aside a screen that covered the
fireplace, he removed from the chimney back, just above the line of
sight, a few loose bricks, and through the hole thus made thrust the
articles he had bought, letting them drop into a fireplace on the other
side.

On leaving the room of this professional receiver of stolen goods, Pinky
and her friend descended to the second story, and by a door which had
been cut through into the adjoining property passed to the rear building
of the house next door. They found themselves on a landing, or little
square hall, with a stairway passing down to the lower story and another
leading to the room above. A number of persons were going up and coming
down--a forlorn set, for the most part, of all sexes, ages and colors.
Those who were going up appeared eager and hopeful, while those who were
coming down looked disappointed, sorrowful, angry or desperate. There
was a “policy shop” in one of the rooms above, and these were some of
its miserable customers. It was the hour when the morning drawings
of the lotteries were received at the office, or “shop,” and the poor
infatuated dupes who had bet on their favorite “rows” were crowding in
to learn the result.

Poor old men and women in scant or wretched clothing, young girls with
faces marred by evil, blotched and bloated creatures of both sexes, with
little that was human in their countenances, except the bare features,
boys and girls not yet in their teens, but old in vice and crime, and
drunkards with shaking nerves,--all these were going up in hope and
coming down in disappointment. Here and there was one of a different
quality, a scantily-dressed woman with a thin, wasted face and hollow
eyes, who had been fighting the wolf and keeping fast hold of her
integrity, or a tender, innocent-looking girl, the messenger of a weak
and shiftless mother, or a pale, bright-eyed boy whose much-worn but
clean and well-kept garments gave sad evidence of a home out of which
prop and stay had been removed. The strong and the weak, the pure and
the defiled, were there. A poor washerwoman who in a moment of weakness
has pawned the garments entrusted to her care, that she might venture
upon a “row” of which she had dreamed, comes shrinking down with a pale,
frightened face, and the bitterness of despair in her heart. She has
lost. What then? She has no friend from whom she can borrow enough money
to redeem the clothing, and if it is not taken home she may be arrested
as a thief and sent to prison. She goes away, and temptation lies close
at her feet. It is her extremity and the evil one's opportunity. So far
she has kept herself pure, but the disgrace of a public prosecution and
a sentence to prison are terrible things to contemplate. She is in peril
of her soul. God help her!

Who is this dressed in rusty black garments and closely veiled, who
comes up from the restaurant, one of the convenient and unsuspected
entrances to this robber's den?--for a “policy-shop” is simply a robbery
shop, and is so regarded by the law, which sets a penalty upon the
“writer” and the “backer” as upon other criminals. But who is this
veiled woman in faded mourning garments who comes gliding as noiselessly
as a ghost out from one of the rooms of the restaurant, and along the
narrow entry leading to the stairway, now so thronged with visitors?
Every day she comes and goes, no one seeing her face, and every day,
with rare exceptions, her step is slower and her form visibly more
shrunken when she goes out than when she comes in. She is a broken-down
gentlewoman, the widow of an officer, who left her at his death a
moderate fortune, and quite sufficient for the comfortable maintenance
of herself and two nearly grown-up daughters. But she had lived at
the South, and there acquired a taste for lottery gambling. During her
husband's lifetime she wasted considerable money in lottery tickets,
once or twice drawing small prizes, but like all lottery dupes spending
a hundred dollars for one gained. The thing had become a sort of mania
with her. She thought so much of prizes and drawn numbers through the
day that she dreamed of them all night. She had a memorandum-book in
which were all the combinations she had ever heard of as taking prizes.
It contained page after page of lucky numbers and fancy “rows,” and was
oftener in her hand than any other book.

There being no public sale of lottery tickets in Northern cities, this
weak and infatuated woman found out where some of the “policy-shops”
 were kept, and instead of buying tickets, as before, risked her money on
numbers that might or might not come out of the wheel in lotteries said
to be drawn in certain Southern States, but chiefly in Kentucky. The
numbers rarely if ever came out. The chances were too remote. After her
husband's death she began fretting over the smallness of her income. It
was not sufficient to give her daughters the advantages she desired
them to have, and she knew of but one way to increase it. That way was
through the policy-shops. So she gave her whole mind to this business,
with as much earnestness and self-absorption as a merchant gives himself
to trade. She had a dream-book, gotten up especially for policy buyers,
and consulted it as regularly as a merchant does his price-current or a
broker the sales of stock. Every day she bet on some “row” or series of
“rows,” rarely venturing less than five dollars, and sometimes, when she
felt more than usually confident, laying down a twenty-dollar bill,
for the “hit” when made gave from fifty to two hundred dollars for each
dollar put down, varying according to the nature of the combinations. So
the more faith a policy buyer had in his “row,” the larger the venture
he would feel inclined to make.

Usually it went all one way with the infatuated lady. Day after day she
ventured, and day after day she lost, until from hundreds the sums she
was spending had aggregated themselves into thousands. She changed from
one policy-shop to another, hoping for better luck. It was her business
to find them out, and this she was able to do by questioning some of
those whom she met at the shops. One of these was in a building on a
principal street, the second story of which was occupied by a milliner.
It was visited mostly by ladies, who could pass in from the street,
no one suspecting their errand. Another was in the attic of a house in
which were many offices and places of business, with people going in and
coming out all the while, none but the initiated being in the secret;
while another was to be found in the rear of a photograph gallery. Every
day and often twice a day, as punctually as any man of business, did
this lady make her calls at one and another of these policy-offices to
get the drawings or make new ventures. At remote intervals she would
make a “hit;” once she drew twenty dollars, and once fifty. But for
these small gains she had paid thousands of dollars.

After a “hit” the betting on numbers would be bolder. Once she selected
what was known as a “lucky row,” and determined to double on it until it
came out a prize. She began by putting down fifty cents. On the next day
she put down a dollar upon the same combination, losing, of course,
Two dollars were ventured on the next day; and so she went on doubling,
until, in her desperate infatuation, she doubled for the ninth time,
putting down two hundred and fifty-six dollars.

If successful now, she would draw over twenty-five thousand dollars.
There was no sleep for the poor lady during the night that followed.
She walked the floor of her chamber in a state of intense nervous
excitement, sometimes in a condition of high hope and confidence and
sometimes haunted by demons of despair. She sold five shares of stock
on which she had been receiving an annual dividend of ten per cent., in
order to get funds for this desperate gambling venture, in which over
five hundred dollars had now been absorbed.

Pale and nervous, she made her appearance at the breakfast-table on the
next morning, unable to take a mouthful of food. It was in vain that her
anxious daughters urged her to eat.

A little after twelve o'clock she was at the policy-office. The drawn
numbers for the morning were already in. Her combination was 4, 10, 40.
With an eagerness that could not be repressed, she caught up the slip
of paper containing the thirteen numbers out of seventy-five, which
purported to have been drawn that morning somewhere in “Kentucky,” and
reported by telegraph--caught it up with hands that shook so violently
that she could not read the figures. She had to lay the piece of paper
down upon the little counter before which she stood, in order that it
might be still, so that she could read her fate.

The first drawn number was 4. What a wild leap her heart gave! The next
was 24; the next 8; the next 70; the next 41, and the next 39. Her heart
grew almost still; the pressure as of a great hand was on her bosom. 10
came next. Two numbers of her row were out. A quiver of excitement ran
through her frame. She caught up the paper, but it shook as before, so
that she could not see the figures. Dashing it back upon the counter,
and holding it down almost violently, she bent over, with eyes starting
from their sockets, and read the line of figures to the end, then sank
over upon the counter with a groan, and lay there half fainting and too
weak to lift herself up. If the 40 had been there, she would have made a
hit of twenty-five thousand dollars. But the 40 was not there, and this
made all the difference.

“Once more,” said the policy-dealer, in a tone of encouragement, as he
bent over the miserable woman. “Yesterday, 4 came out; to-day, 4, 10;
tomorrow will be the lucky chance; 4, 10, 40 will surely be drawn. I
never knew this order to fail. If it had been 10 first, and then 4, 10,
or 10, 4, I would not advise you to go on. But 4, 10, 40 will be drawn
to-morrow as sure as fate.”

“What numbers did you say? 4, 10, 40?” asked an old man, ragged and
bloated, who came shuffling in as the last remarks was made.

“Yes,” answered the dealer. “This lady has been doubling, and as the
chances go, her row is certain to make a hit to-morrow.”

“Ha! What's the row? 4, 10, 40?”

“Yes.”

The old man fumbled in his pocket, and brought out ten cents.

“I'll go that on the row. Give me a piece.”

The dealer took a narrow slip of paper and wrote on it the date, the
sum risked and the combination of figures, and handed it to the old man,
saying,

“Come here to-morrow; and if the bottom of the world doesn't drop out,
you'll find ten dollars waiting for you.”

Two or three others were in by this time, eager to look over the list of
drawn numbers and to make new bets.

“Glory!” cried one of them, a vile-looking young woman, and she
commenced dancing about the room.

All was excitement now. “A hit! a hit!” was cried. “How much? how much?”
 and they gathered to the little counter and desk of the policy-dealer.

“1, 2, 3,” cried the girl, dancing about and waving her little slip
of paper over her head. “I knew it would come--dreamed of them numbers
three nights hand running! Hand over the money, old chap! Fifteen
dollars for fifteen cents! That's the go!”

The policy-dealer took the girl's “piece,” and after comparing it with
the record of drawn numbers, said, in a pleased voice,

“All right! A hit, sure enough. You're in luck to-day.”

The girl took the money, that was promptly paid down, and as she counted
it over the dealer remarked,

“There's a doubling game going on, and it's to be up to-morrow, sure.”

“What's the row?” inquired the girl.

“4, 10, 40,” said the dealer.

“Then count me in;” and she laid down five dollars on the counter.

“Take my advice and go ten,” urged the policy-dealer.

“No, thank you! shouldn't know what to do with more than five hundred
dollars. I'll only go five dollars this time.”

The “writer,” as a policy-seller is called, took the money and gave
the usual written slip of paper containing the selected numbers;
loudly proclaiming her good luck, the girl then went away. She was an
accomplice to whom a “piece” had been secretly given after the drawn
numbers were in.

Of course this hit was the sensation of the day among the policy-buyers
at that office, and brought in large gains.

The wretched woman who had just seen five hundred dollars vanish into
nothing instead of becoming, as under the wand of an enchanter, a
great heap of gold, listened in a kind of maze to what passed around
her--listened and let the tempter get to her ear again. She went away,
stooping in her gait as one bearing a heavy burden. Before an hour had
passed hope had lifted her again into confidence. She had to make but
one venture more to double on the risk of the day previous, and secure a
fortune that would make both herself and daughters independent for life.

Another sale of good stocks, another gambling venture and another loss,
swelling the aggregate in this wild and hopeless “doubling” experiment
to over a thousand dollars.

But she was not cured. As regularly as a drunkard goes to the bar went
she to the policy-shops, every day her fortune growing less. Poverty
began to pinch. The house in which she lived with her daughters was
sold, and the unhappy family shrunk into a single room in a third-rate
boarding-house. But their income soon became insufficient to meet the
weekly demand for board. Long before this the daughters had sought for
something to do by which to earn a little money. Pride struggled hard
with them, but necessity was stronger than pride.

We finish the story in a few words. In a moment of weakness, with want
and hard work staring her in the face, one of the daughters married
a man who broke her heart and buried her in less than two years. The
other, a weak and sickly girl, got a situation as day governess in the
family of an old friend of her father's, where she was kindly treated,
but she lived only a short time after her sister's death.

And still there was no abatement of the mother's infatuation. She was
more than half insane on the subject of policy gambling, and confident
of yet retrieving her fortunes.

At the time Pinky Swett and her friend in evil saw her come gliding up
from the restaurant in faded mourning garments and closely veiled, she
was living alone in a small, meagrely furnished room, and cooking her
own food.

Everything left to her at her husband's death was gone. She earned a
dollar or two each week by making shirts and drawers for the slop-shops,
spending every cent of this in policies. A few old friends who pitied
her, but did not know of the vice in which she indulged, paid her
rent and made occasional contributions for her support. All of these
contributions, beyond the amount required for a very limited supply of
food, went to the policy-shops. It was a mystery to her friends how she
had managed to waste the handsome property left by her husband, but no
one suspected the truth.




CHAPTER X.



“_WHO'S_ that, I wonder?” asked Nell Peter as the dark, close-veiled
figure glided past them on the stairs.

“Oh, she's a policy-drunkard,” answered Pinky, loud enough to be heard
by the woman, who, as if surprised or alarmed, stopped and turned her
head, her veil falling partly away, and disclosing features so pale and
wasted that she looked more like a ghost than living flesh and blood.
There was a strange gleam in her eyes. She paused only for an instant,
but her steps were slower as she went on climbing the steep and narrow
stairs that led to the policy-office.

“Good Gracious, Pinky! did you ever see such a face?” exclaimed Nell
Peter. “It's a walking ghost, I should say, and no woman at all.”

“Oh, I've seen lots of 'em,” answered Pinky. “She's a policy-drunkard.
Bad as drinking when it once gets hold of 'em. They tipple all the time,
sell anything, beg, borrow, steal or starve themselves to get money to
buy policies. She's one of 'em that's starving.”

By this time they had reached the policy-office. It was in a small room
on the third floor of the back building, yet as well known to the police
of the district as if it had been on the front street. One of these
public guardians soon after his appointment through political influence,
and while some wholesome sense of duty and moral responsibility yet
remained, caused the “writer” in this particular office to be arrested.
He thought that he had done a good thing, and looked for approval and
encouragement. But to his surprise and chagrin he found that he had
blundered. The case got no farther than the alderman's. Just how it was
managed he did not know, but it was managed, and the business of the
office went on as before.

A little light came to him soon after, on meeting a prominent politician
to whom he was chiefly indebted for his appointment. Said this
individual, with a look of warning and a threat in his voice,

“See here, my good fellow; I'm told that you've been going out of your
way and meddling with the policy-dealers. Take my advice, and mind your
own business. If you don't, it will be all day with you. There isn't a
man in town strong enough to fight this thing, so you'd better let it
alone.”

And he did let it alone. He had a wife and three little children, and
couldn't afford to lose his place. So he minded his own business, and
let it alone.

Pinky and her friend entered this small third-story back room. Behind a
narrow, unpainted counter, having a desk at one end, stood a middle-aged
man, with dark, restless eyes that rarely looked you in the face. He
wore a thick but rather closely-cut beard and moustache. The police knew
him very well; so did the criminal lawyers, when he happened to come in
their way; so did the officials of two or three State prisons in which
he had served out partial sentences. He was too valuable to political
“rings” and associations antagonistic to moral and social well-being
to be left idle in the cell of a penitentiary for the whole term of a
commitment. Politicians have great influence, and governors are human.

On the walls of the room were pasted a few pictures cut from the
illustrated papers, some of them portraits of leading politicians, and
some of them portraits of noted pugilists and sporting-men. The picture
of a certain judge, who had made himself obnoxious to the fraternity
of criminals by his severe sentences, was turned upside down. There was
neither table nor chair in the room.

The woman in black had passed in just before the girls, and was waiting
her turn to examine the drawn numbers. She had not tasted food since the
day before, having ventured her only dime on a policy, and was feeling
strangely faint and bewildered. She did not have to wait long. It was
the old story. Her combination had not come out, and she was starving.
As she moved back toward the door she staggered a little. Pinky, who had
become curious about her, noticed this, and watched her as she went out.

“It's about up with the old lady, I guess,” she said to her companion,
with an unfeeling laugh.

And she was right. On the next morning the poor old woman was found dead
in her room, and those who prepared her for burial said that she
was wasted to a skeleton. She had, in fact, starved herself in her
infatuation, spending day after day in policies what she should have
spent for food. Pinky's strange remark was but too true. She had become
a policy-drunkard--a vice almost as disastrous in its effects as its
kindred, vice, intemperance, though less brutalizing and less openly
indulged.

“Where now?” was the question of Pinky's friend as they came down, after
spending in policies all the money they had received from the sale of
Flora Bond's clothing. “Any other game?”

“Yes.”

“What?”

“Come along to my room, and I'll tell you.”

“Round in Ewing street?”

“Yes. Great game up, if I can only get on the track.”

“What is it?”

“There's a cast-off baby in Dirty Alley, and Fan Bray knows its mother,
and she's rich.”

“What?”

“Fan's getting lots of hush-money.”

“Goody! but that is game!”

“Isn't it? The baby's owned by two beggar-women who board it in Dirty
Alley. It's 'most starved and frozen to death, and Fan's awful 'fraid
it may die. She wants me to steal it for her, so that she may have it
better taken care of, and I was going to do it last night, when I got
into a muss.”

“Who's the woman that boards it?”

“She lives in a cellar, and is drunk every night. Can steal the brat
easily enough; but if I can't find out who it belongs to, you see it
will be trouble for nothing.”

“No, I don't see any such thing,” answered Nell Peter. “If you can't get
hush-money out of its mother, you can bleed Fanny Bray.”

“That's so, and I'm going to bleed her. The mother, you see, thinks
the baby's dead. The proud old grandmother gave it away, as soon as was
born, to a woman that Fan Bray found for her. Its mother was out of her
head, and didn't know nothing. That woman sold the baby to the women who
keep it to beg with. She's gone up the spout now, and nobody knows who
the mother and grandmother are but Fan, and nobody knows where the baby
is but me and Fan. She's bleeding the old lady, and promises to share
with me if I keep track of the baby and see that it isn't killed or
starved to death. But I don't trust her. She puts me off with fives and
tens, when I'm sure she gets hundreds. Now, if we have the baby all
to ourselves, and find out the mother and grandmother, won't we have a
splendid chance? I'll bet you on that.”

“Won't we? Why, Pinky, this is a gold-mine!”

“Didn't I tell you there was great game up? I was just wanting some one
to help me. Met you in the nick of time.”

The two girls had now reached Pinky's room in Ewing street, where they
continued in conference for a long time before settling their plans.

“Does Fan know where you live?” queried Nell Peter.

“Yes.”

“Then you will have to change your quarters.”

“Easily done. Doesn't take half a dozen furniture-cars to move me.”

“I know a room.”

“Where?”

“It's a little too much out of the way, you'll think, maybe, but
it's just the dandy for hiding in. You cart keep the brat there, and
nobody--”

“Me keep the brat?” interrupted Pinky, with a derisive laugh. “That's a
good one! I see myself turned baby-tender! Ha! ha! that's funny!”

“What do you expect to do with the child after you steal it?” asked
Pinky's friend.

“I don't intend to nurse it or have it about me.”

“What then?”

“Board if with some one who doesn't get drunk or buy policies.”

“You'll hunt for a long time.”

“Maybe, but I'll try. Anyhow, it can't be worse off than it is now. What
I'm afraid of is that it will be out of its misery before we can get
hold of it. The woman who is paid for keeping it at night doesn't give
it any milk--just feeds it on bread soaked in water, and that is slow
starvation. It's the way them that don't want to keep their babies get
rid of them about here.”

“The game's up if the baby dies,” said Nell Peter, growing excited under
this view of the case. “If it only gets bread soaked in water, it can't
live. I've seen that done over and over again. They're starving a baby
on bread and water now just over from my room, and it cries and frets
and moans all the time it's awake, poor little wretch! I've been
in hopes for a week that they'd give it an overdose of paregoric or
something else.”

“We must fix it to-night in some way,” answered Pinky. “Where's the room
you spoke of?”

“In Grubb's court. You know Grubb's court?--a kind of elbow going off
from Rider's court. There's a room up there that you can get where even
the police would hardly find you out.”

“Thieves live there,” said Pinky.

“No matter. They'll not trouble you or the baby.”

“Is the room furnished?”

“Yes. There's a bed and a table and two chairs.”

After farther consultation it was decided that Pinky should move at
once from her present lodgings to the room in Grubb's court, and get, if
possible, possession of the baby that very night. The moving was easily
accomplished after the room was secured. Two small bundles of clothing
constituted Pinky's entire effects; and taking these, the two girls went
quietly out, leaving a week's rent unpaid.

The night that closed this early winter day was raw and cold, the
easterly wind still prevailing, with occasional dashes of rain. In a
cellar without fire, except a few bits of smouldering wood in an old
clay furnace, that gave no warmth to the damp atmosphere, and with
scarcely an article of furniture, a woman half stupid from drink sat on
a heap of straw, her bed, with her hands clasped about her knees. She
was rocking her body backward and forward, and crooning to herself in a
maudlin way. A lighted tallow candle stood on the floor of the cellar,
and near it a cup of water, in which was a spoon and some bread soaking.

“Mother Hewitt!” called a voice from the cellar door that opened on the
street. “Here, take the baby!”

Mother Hewitt, as she was called, started up and made her way with an
unsteady gait to the front part of the cellar, where a woman in not
much better condition than herself stood holding out a bundle of rags in
which a fretting baby was wrapped.

“Quick, quick!” called the woman. “And see here,” she continued as
Mother Hewitt reached her arms for the baby; “I don't believe you're
doing the right thing. Did he have plenty of milk last night and this
morning?”

“Just as much as he would take.”

“I don't believe it. He's been frettin' and chawin' at the strings of
his hood all the afternoon, when he ought to have been asleep, and he's
looking punier every day. I believe you're giving him only bread and
water.”

But Mother Hewitt protested that she gave him the best of new milk, and
as much as he would take.

“Well, here's a quarter,” said the woman, handing Mother Hewitt some
money; “and see that he is well fed to-night and to-morrow morning. He's
getting 'most too deathly in his face. The people won't stand it if they
think a baby's going to die--the women 'specially, and most of all the
young things that have lost babies. One of these--I know 'em by the way
they look out of their eyes--came twice to-day and stood over him sad
and sorrowful like; she didn't give me anything. I've seen her before.
Maybe she's his mother. As like as nor, for nobody knows where he came
from. Wasn't Sally Long's baby; always thought she'd stole him from
somebody. Now, mind, he's to have good milk every day, or I'll change
his boarding-house. D'ye hear!”

And laughing at this sally, the woman turned away to spend in a night's
debauch the money she had gained in half a day's begging.

Left to herself, Mother Hewitt went staggering back with the baby in
her arms, and seated herself on the ground beside the cup of bread and
water, which was mixed to the consistence of cream. As she did so the
light of her poor candle fell on the baby's face. It was pinched and
hungry and ashen pale, the thin lips wrought by want and suffering into
such sad expressions of pain that none but the most stupid and hardened
could look at them and keep back a gush of tears.

But Mother Hewitt saw nothing of this--felt nothing of this. Pity and
tenderness had long since died out of her heart. As she laid the baby
back on one arm she took a spoonful of the mixture prepared for its
supper, and pushed it roughly into its mouth. The baby swallowed it with
a kind of starving eagerness, but with no sign of satisfaction on
its sorrowful little face. But Mother Hewitt was too impatient to get
through with her work of feeding the child, and thrust in spoonful after
spoonful until it choked, when she shook it angrily, calling it vile
names.

The baby cried feebly at this, when she shook it again and slapped it
with her heavy hand. Then it grew still. She put the spoon again to its
lips, but it shut them tightly and turned its head away.

“Very well,” said Mother Hewitt. “If you won't, you won't;” and she
tossed the helpless thing as she would have tossed a senseless bundle
over upon the heap of straw that served as a bed, adding, as she did so,
“I never coaxed my own brats.”

The baby did not cry. Mother Hewitt then blew out the candle, and
groping her way to the door of the cellar that opened on the street,
went out, shutting down the heavy door behind her, and leaving the child
alone in that dark and noisome den--alone in its foul and wet garments,
but, thanks to kindly drugs, only partially conscious of its misery.

Mother Hewitt's first visit was to the nearest dram-shop. Here she spent
for liquor five cents of the money she had received. From the dram-shop
she went to Sam McFaddon's policy-office. This was not hidden away,
like most of the offices, in an upper room or a back building or in some
remote cellar, concealed from public observation, but stood with open
door on the very street, its customers going in and out as freely and
unquestioned as the customers of its next-door neighbor, the dram-shop.
Policemen passed Sam's door a hundred times in every twenty-four hours,
saw his customers going in and out, knew their errand, talked with Sam
about his business, some of them trying their luck occasionally after
there had been an exciting “hit,” but none reporting him or in any way
interfering with his unlicensed plunder of the miserable and besotted
wretches that crowded his neighborhood.

From the whisky-shop to the policy-shop went Mother Hewitt. Here she put
down five cents more; she never bet higher than this on a “row.” From
the policy-shop she went back to the whisky-shop, and took another
drink. By this time she was beginning to grow noisy. It so happened that
the woman who had left the baby with her a little while before came in
just then, and being herself much the worse for drink, picked a quarrel
with Mother Hewitt, accusing her of getting drunk on the money she
received for keeping the baby, and starving it to death. A fight was the
consequence, in which they were permitted to tear and scratch and bruise
each other in a shocking way, to the great enjoyment of the little
crowd of debased and brutal men and women who filled the dram-shop. But
fearing a visit from the police, the owner of the den, a strong, coarse
Irishman, interfered, and dragging the women apart, pushed Mother Hewitt
out, giving her so violent an impetus that she fell forward into the
middle of the narrow street, where she lay unable to rise, not from any
hurt, but from sheer intoxication.

“What's up now?” cried one and another as this little ripple of
disturbance broke upon that vile and troubled sea of humanity.

“Only Mother Hewitt drunk again!” lightly spoke a young girl not out
of her teens, but with a countenance that seemed marred by centuries of
debasing evil. Her laugh would have made an angel shiver.

A policeman came along, and stood for a little while looking at the
prostrate woman.

“It's Mother Hewitt,” said one of the bystanders.

“Here, Dick,” and the policeman spoke to a man near him. “Take hold of
her feet.”

The man did as told, and the policeman lifting the woman's head and
shoulders, they carried her a short distance, to where a gate opened
into a large yard used for putting in carts and wagons at night, and
deposited her on the ground just inside.

“She can sleep it off there,” said the policeman as he dropped his
unseemly load. “She'll have a-plenty to keep her company before
morning.”

And so they left her without covering or shelter in the wet and chilly
air of a late November night, drunk and asleep.

As the little crowd gathered by this ripple of excitement melted away, a
single figure remained lurking in a corner of the yard and out of sight
in its dark shadow. It was that of a man. The moment he was alone with
the unconscious woman he glided toward her with the alert movements of
an animal, and with a quickness that made his work seem instant, rifled
her pockets. His gains were ten cents and the policy-slip she had just
received at Sam McFaddon's. He next examined her shoes, but they were of
no value, lifted her dirty dress and felt its texture for a moment, then
dropped it with a motion of disgust and a growl of disappointment.

As he came out from the yard with his poor booty, the light from a
street-lamp fell on as miserable a looking wretch as ever hid himself
from the eyes of day--dirty, ragged, bloated, forlorn, with scarcely a
trace of manhood in his swollen and disfigured face. His steps, quick
from excitement a few moments before, were now shambling and made
with difficulty. He had not far to walk for what he was seeking. The
ministers to his appetite were all about him, a dozen in every block of
that terrible district that seemed as if forsaken by God and man. Into
the first that came in his way he went with nervous haste, for he had
not tasted of the fiery stimulant he was craving with a fierce and
unrelenting thirst for many hours. He did not leave the bar until he had
drank as much of the burning poison its keeper dispensed as his booty
would purchase. In less than half an hour he was thrown dead drunk into
the street and then carried by policemen to the old wagon-yard, to take
his night's unconscious rest on the ground in company with Mother Hewitt
and a score besides of drunken wretches who were pitilessly turned out
from the various dram-shops after their money was spent, and who
were not considered by the police worth the trouble of taking to the
station-house.

When Mother Hewitt crept back into her cellar at daylight, the baby was
gone.




CHAPTER XI.



_FOR_ more than a week after Edith's call on Dr. Radcliffe she seemed to
take but little interest in anything, and remained alone in her room
for a greater part of the time, except when her father was in the house.
Since her questions about her baby a slight reserve had risen up between
them. During this time she went out at least once every day, and when
questioned by her mother as to where she had been, evaded any direct
answer. If questioned more closely, she would show a rising spirit and
a decision of manner that had the effect to silence and at the same time
to trouble Mrs. Dinneford, whose mind was continually on the rack.

One day the mother and daughter met in a part of the city where neither
of them dreamed of seeing the other. It was not far from where Mrs. Bray
lived. Mrs. Dinneford had been there on a purgational visit, and had
come away lighter in purse and with a heavier burden of fear and anxiety
on her heart.

“What are you doing here?” she demanded.

“I've been to St. John's mission sewing-school,” replied Edith. “I have
a class there.”

“You have! Why didn't you tell me this before? I don't like such doings.
This is no place for you.”

“My place is where I can do good,” returned Edith, speaking slowly, but
with great firmness.

“Good! You can do good if you want to without demeaning yourself to work
like this. I don't want you mixed up with these low, vile people, and I
won't have it!” Mrs. Dinneford spoke in a sharp, positive voice.

Edith made no answer, and they walked on together.

“I shall speak to your father about this,” said Mrs. Dinneford. “It
isn't reputable. I wouldn't have you seen here for the world.”

“I shall walk unhurt; you need not fear,” returned Edith.

There was silence between them for some time, Edith not caring to speak,
and her mother in doubt as to what it were best to say.

“How long have you been going to St. John's mission school?” at length
queried Mrs. Dinneford.

“I've been only a few times,” replied Edith.

“And have a class of diseased and filthy little wretches, I
suppose--gutter children?”

“They are God's children,” said Edith, in a tone of rebuke.

“Oh, don't preach to me!” was angrily replied.

“I only said what was true,” remarked Edith.

There was silence again.

“Are you going directly home?” asked Mrs. Dinneford, after they had
walked the distance of several blocks. Edith replied that she was.

“Then you'd better take that car. I shall not be home for an hour yet.”

They separated, Edith taking the car. As soon as she was alone Mrs.
Dinneford quickened her steps, like a person who had been held back
from some engagement. A walk of ten minutes brought her to one of
the principal hotels of the city. Passing in, she went up to a
reception-parlor, where she was met by a man who rose from a seat
near the windows and advanced to the middle of the room. He was of low
stature, with quick, rather nervous movements, had dark, restless eyes,
and wore a heavy black moustache that was liberally sprinkled with
gray. The lower part of his face was shaved clean. He showed some
embarrassment as he came forward to meet Mrs. Dinneford.

“Mr. Feeling,” she said, coldly.

The man bowed with a mixture of obsequiousness and familiarity, and
tried to look steadily into Mrs. Dinneford's face, but was not able to
do so. There was a steadiness and power in her eyes that his could not
bear.

“What do you want with me, sir?” she demanded, a little sharply.

“Take a chair, and I will tell you,” replied Freeling, and he turned,
moving toward a corner of the room, she following. They sat down, taking
chairs near each other.

“There's trouble brewing,” said the man, his face growing dark and
anxious.

“What kind of trouble?”

“I had a letter from George Granger yesterday.”

“What!” The color went out of the lady's face.

“A letter from George Granger. He wished to see me.”

“Did you go?”

“Yes.”

“What did he want?”

Freeling took a deep breath, and sighed. His manner was troubled.

“What did he want?” Mrs. Dinneford repeated the question.

“He's as sane as you or I,” said Freeling.

“Is he? Oh, very well! Then let him go to the State's prison.” Mrs.
Dinneford said this with some bravado in her manner. But the color did
not come back to her face.

“He has no idea of that,” was replied.

“What then?” The lady leaned toward Freeling. Her hands moved nervously.

“He means to have the case in court again, but on a new issue.”

“He does!”

“Yes; says that he's innocent, and that you and I know it--that he's the
victim of a conspiracy, and that we are the conspirators!”

“Talk!--amounts to nothing,” returned Mrs. Dinneford, with a faint
little laugh.

“I don't know about that. It's ugly talk, and especially so, seeing that
it's true.”

“No one will give credence to the ravings of an insane criminal.”

“People are quick to credit an evil report. They will pity and believe
him, now that the worst is reached. A reaction in public feeling has
already taken place. He has one or two friends left who do not hesitate
to affirm that there has been foul play. One of these has been tampering
with a clerk of mine, and I came upon them with their heads together
on the street a few days ago, and had my suspicions aroused by their
startled look when they saw me.”

“'What did that man want with you?' I inquired, when the clerk came in.

“He hesitated a moment, and then replied, 'He was asking me something
about Mr. Granger.'

“'What about him?' I queried. 'He asked me if I knew anything in regard
to the forgery,' he returned.

“I pressed him with questions, and found that suspicion was on the right
track. This friend of Granger's asked particularly about your visits
to the store, and whether he had ever noticed anything peculiar in
our intercourse--anything that showed a familiarity beyond what would
naturally arise between a customer and salesman.”

“There's nothing in that,” said Mrs. Dinneford. “If you and I keep our
own counsel, we are safe. The testimony of a condemned criminal goes for
nothing. People may surmise and talk as much as they please, but no one
knows anything about those notes but you and I and George.”

“A pardon from the governor may put a new aspect on the case.”

“A pardon!” There was a tremor of alarm in Mrs. Dinneford's voice.

“Yes; that, no doubt, will be the first move.”

“The first move! Why, Mr. Freeling, you don't think anything like this
is in contemplation?”

“I'm afraid so. George, as I have said, is no more crazy than you or I.
But he cannot come out of the asylum, as the case now stands, without
going to the penitentiary. So the first move of his friends will be to
get a pardon. Then he is our equal in the eyes of the law. It would be
an ugly thing for you and me to be sued for a conspiracy to ruin this
young man, and have the charge of forgery added to the count.”

Mrs. Dinneford gave a low cry, and shivered.

“But it may come to that.”

“Impossible!”

“The prudent man foreseeth the evil and hideth himself, but the simple
pass on and are punished,” said Freeling. “It is for this that I have
sent for you. It's an ugly business, and I was a weak fool ever to have
engaged in it.”

“You were a free agent.”

“I was a weak fool.”

“As you please,” returned Mrs. Dinneford, coldly, and drawing herself
away from him.

It was some moments before either of them spoke again. Then Freeling
said,

“I was awake all night, thinking over this matter, and it looks uglier
the more I think of it. It isn't likely that enough evidence could be
found to convict either of us, but to be tried on such an accusation
would be horrible.”

“Horrible! horrible!” ejaculated Mrs. Dinneford. “What is to be done?”
 She gave signs of weakness and terror. Freeling observed her closely,
then felt his way onward.

“We are in great peril,” he said. “There is no knowing what turn affairs
will take. I only wish I were a thousand miles from here. It would be
safer for us both.” Then, after a pause, he added, “If I were foot-free,
I would be off to-morrow.”

He watched Mrs. Dinneford closely, and saw a change creep over her face.

“If I were to disappear suddenly,” he resumed, “suspicion, if it took
a definite shape, would fall on me. You would not be thought of in the
matter.”

He paused again, observing his companion keenly but stealthily. He was
not able to look her fully in the face.

“Speak out plainly,” said Mrs. Dinneford, with visible impatience.

“Plainly, then, madam,” returned Freeling, changing his whole bearing
toward her, and speaking as one who felt that he was master of the
situation, “it has come to this: I shall have to break up and leave
the city, or there will be a new trial in which you and I will be the
accused. Now, self-preservation is the first law of nature. I don't mean
to go to the State's prison if I can help it. What I am now debating
are the chances in my favor if Granger gets a pardon, and then makes
an effort to drive us to the wall, which he most surely will. I have
settled it so far--”

Mrs. Dinneford leaned toward him with an anxious expression on her
countenance, waiting for the next sentence. But Freeling did not go on.

“How have you settled it?” she demanded, trembling as she spoke with the
excitement of suspense.

“That I am not going to the wall if I can help it.”

“How will you help it?”

“I have an accomplice;” and this time he was able to look at Mrs.
Dinneford with such a fixed and threatening gaze that her eyes fell.

“You have?” she questioned, in a husky voice.

“Yes.”

“Who?”

“Mrs. Helen Dinneford. And do you think for a moment that to save myself
I would hesitate to sacrifice her?”

The lady's face grew white. She tried to speak, but could not.

“I am talking plainly, as you desired, madam,” continued Freeling.
“You led me into this thing. It was no scheme of mine; and if more evil
consequences are to come, I shall do my best to save my own head. Let
the hurt go to where it rightfully belongs.”

“What do you mean?” Mrs. Dinneford tried to rally herself.

“Just this,” was answered: “if I am dragged into court, I mean to go
in as a witness, and not as a criminal. At the first movement toward an
indictment, I shall see the district attorney, whom I know very well,
and give him such information in the case as will lead to fixing the
crime on you alone, while I will come in as the principal witness. This
will make your conviction certain.”

“Devil!” exclaimed Mrs. Dinneford, her white face convulsed and her eyes
starting from their sockets with rage and fear. “Devil!” she repeated,
not able to control her passion.

“Then you know me,” was answered, with cool self-possession, “and what
you have to expect.”

Neither spoke for a considerable time. Up to this period they had been
alone in the parlor. Guests of the house now came in and took seats
near them. They arose and walked the floor for a little while, still in
silence, then passed into an adjoining parlor that happened to be empty,
and resumed the conference.

“This is a last resort,” remarked Freeling, softening his voice as they
sat down--“a card that I do not wish to play, and shall not if I can
help it. But it is best that you should know that it is in my hand. If
there is any better way of escape, I shall take it.”

“You spoke of going away,” said Mrs. Dinneford.

“Yes. But that involves a great deal.”

“What?”

“The breaking up of my business, and loss of money and opportunities
that I can hardly hope ever to regain.”

“Why loss of money?”

“I shall have to wind up hurriedly, and it will be impossible to collect
more than a small part of my outstanding claims. I shall have to go
away under a cloud, and it will not be prudent to return. Most of these
claims will therefore become losses. The amount of capital I shall be
able to take will not be sufficient to do more than provide for a small
beginning in some distant place and under an assumed name. On the other
hand, if I remain and fight the thing through, as I have no doubt I can,
I shall keep my business and my place in society here--hurt, it may be,
in my good name, but still with the main chance all right. But it will
be hard for you. If I pass the ordeal safely, you will not. And the
question to consider is whether you can make it to my interest to go
away, to drop out of sight, injured in fortune and good name, while you
go unscathed. You now have it all in a nutshell. I will not press you to
a decision to-day. Your mind is too much disturbed. To-morrow, at noon,
I would like to see you again.”

Freeling made a motion to rise, but Mrs. Dinneford did not stir.

“Perhaps,” he said, “you decide at once to let things take their course.
Understand me, I am ready for either alternative. The election is with
yourself.”

Mrs. Dinneford was too much stunned by all this to be able to come to
any conclusion. She seemed in the maze of a terrible dream, full of
appalling reality. To wait for twenty-four hours in this state of
uncertainty was more than her thoughts could endure. And yet she must
have time to think, and to get command of her mental resources.

“Will you be disengaged at five o'clock?” she asked.

“Yes.”

“I will be here at five.”

“Very well.”

Mrs. Dinneford arose with a weary air.

“I shall want to hear from you very explicitly,” she said. “If your
demand is anywhere in the range of reason and possibility, I may
meet it. If outside of that range, I shall of course reject it. It is
possible that you may not hold all the winning cards--in fact, I know
that you do not.”

“I will be here at five,” said Freeling.

“Very well. I shall be on time.”

And they turned from each other, passing from the parlor by separate
doors.




CHAPTER XII.



_ONE_ morning, about two weeks later, Mr. Freeling did not make his
appearance at his place of business as usual. At ten o'clock a clerk
went to the hotel where he boarded to learn the cause of his absence. He
had not been there since the night before. His trunks and clothing were
all in their places, and nothing in the room indicated anything more
than an ordinary absence.

Twelve o'clock, and still Mr. Freeling had not come to the store. Two
or three notes were to be paid that day, and the managing-clerk began
to feel uneasy. The bank and check books were in a private drawer in the
fireproof of which Mr. Freeling had the key. So there was no means of
ascertaining the balances in bank.

At one o'clock it was thought best to break open the private drawer and
see how matters stood. Freeling kept three bank-accounts, and it was
found that on the day before he had so nearly checked out all the
balances that the aggregate on deposit was not over twenty dollars. In
looking back over these bank-accounts, it was seen that within a week he
had made deposits of over fifty thousand dollars, and that most of
the checks drawn against these deposits were in sums of five thousand
dollars each.

At three o'clock he was still absent. His notes went to protest, and on
the next day his city creditors took possession of his effects. One fact
soon became apparent--he had been paying the rogue's game on a pretty
liberal scale, having borrowed on his checks, from business friends
and brokers, not less than sixty or seventy thousand dollars. It was
estimated, on a thorough examination of his business, that he had
gone off with at least a hundred thousand dollars. To this amount Mrs.
Dinneford had contributed from her private fortune the sum of twenty
thousand dollars. Not until she had furnished him with that large amount
would he consent to leave the city. He magnified her danger, and so
overcame her with terrors that she yielded to his exorbitant demand.

On the day a public newspaper announcement of Freeling's rascality was
made, Mrs. Dinneford went to bed sick of a nervous fever, and was for a
short period out of her mind.

Neither Mr. Dinneford nor Edith had failed to notice a change in Mrs.
Dinneford. She was not able to hide her troubled feelings. Edith was
watching her far more closely than she imagined; and now that she was
temporarily out of her mind, she did not let a word or look escape
her. The first aspect of her temporary aberration was that of fear and
deprecation. She was pursued by some one who filled her with terror,
and she would lift her hands to keep him off, or hide her head in abject
alarm. Then she would beg him to keep away. Once she said,

“It's no use; I can't do anything more. You're a vampire!”

“Who is a vampire?” asked Edith, hoping that her mother would repeat
some name.

But the question seemed to put her on her guard. The expression of fear
went out of her face, and she looked at her daughter curiously.

Edith did not repeat the question. In a little while the mother's
wandering thoughts began to find words again, and she went on talking
in broken sentences out of which little could be gleaned. At length she
said, turning to Edith and speaking with the directness of one in her
right mind,

“I told you her name was Gray, didn't I? Gray, not Bray.”

It was only by a quick and strong effort that Edith could steady her
voice as she replied:

“Yes; you said it was Gray.”

“Gray, not Bray. You thought it was Bray.”

“But it's Gray,” said Edith, falling in with her mother's humor. Then
she added, still trying to keep her voice even,

“She was my nurse when baby was born.”

“Yes; she was the nurse, but she didn't--”

Checking herself, Mrs. Dinneford rose on one arm and looked at Edith in
a frightened way, then said, hurriedly,

“Oh, it's dead, it's dead! You know that; and the woman's dead, too.”

Edith sat motionless and silent as a statue, waiting for what more might
come. But her mother shut her lips tightly, and turned her head away.

A long time elapsed before she was able to read in her mother's confused
utterances anything to which she could attach a meaning. At last Mrs.
Dinneford spoke out again, and with an abruptness that startled her:

“Not another dollar, sir! Remember, you don't hold _all_ the winning
cards!”

Edith held her breath, and sat motionless. Her mother muttered and
mumbled incoherently for a while, and then said, sharply,

“I said I would ruin him, and I've done it!”

“Ruin who?” asked Edith, in a repressed voice.

This question, instead of eliciting an answer, as Edith had hoped,
brought her mother back to semi-consciousness. She rose again in bed,
and looked at her daughter in the same frightened way she had done a
little while before, then laid herself over on the pillows again. Her
lips were tightly shut.

Edith was almost wild with suspense. The clue to that sad and painful
mystery which was absorbing her life seemed almost in her grasp. A
word from those closely-shut lips, and she would have certainty for
uncertainty. But she waited and waited until she grew faint, and still
the lips kept silent.

But after a while Mrs. Dinneford grew uneasy, and began talking. She
moved her head from side to side, threw her arms about restlessly and
appeared greatly disturbed.

“Not dead, Mrs. Bray?” she cried out, at last, in a clear, strong voice.

Edith became fixed as a statue once more.

A few moments, and Mrs. Dinneford added,

“No, no! I won't have her coming after me. More money! You're a
vampire!”

Then she muttered, and writhed and distorted her face like one in some
desperate struggle. Edith shuddered as she stood over her.

After this wild paroxysm Mrs. Dinneford grew more quiet, and seemed to
sleep. Edith remained sitting by the bedside, her thoughts intent on the
strange sentences that had fallen from her Mother's lips. What mystery
lay behind them? Of what secret were they an obscure revelation? “Not
dead!” Who not dead? And again, “It's dead! You know that; and the
woman's dead, too.” Then it was plain that she had heard aright the name
of the person who had called on her mother, and about whom her mother
had made a mystery. It was Bray; if not, why the anxiety to make her
believe it Gray? And this woman had been her nurse. It was plain, also,
that money was being paid for keeping secret. What secret? Then a life
had been ruined. “I said I would ruin him, and I've done it!” Who? who
could her mother mean but the unhappy man she had once called husband,
now a criminal in the eyes of the law, and only saved by insanity from a
criminal's cell?

Putting all together, Edith's mind quickly wrought out a theory, and
this soon settled into a conviction--a conviction so close to fact that
all the chief elements were true.

During her mother's temporary aberration, Edith never left her room
except for a few minutes at a time. Not a word or sentence escaped
her notice. But she waited and listened in vain for anything more. The
talking paroxysm was over. A stupor of mind and body followed. Out
of this a slow recovery came, but it did not progress to a full
convalescence. Mrs. Dinneford went forth from her sick-chamber weak and
nervous, starting at sudden noises, and betraying a perpetual uneasiness
and suspense. Edith was continually on the alert, watching every look
and word and act with untiring scrutiny. Mrs. Dinneford soon became
aware of this. Guilt made her wary, and danger inspired prudence.
Edith's whole manner had changed. Why? was her natural query. Had she
been wandering in her mind? Had she given any clue to the dark secrets
she was hiding? Keen observation became mutual. Mother and daughter
watched each other with a suspicion that never slept.

It was over a month from the time Freeling disappeared before Mrs.
Dinneford was strong enough to go out, except in her carriage. In every
case where she had ridden out, Edith had gone with her.

“If you don't care about riding, it's no matter,” the mother would say,
when she saw Edith getting ready. “I can go alone. I feel quite well and
strong.”

But Edith always had some reason for going against which her mother
could urge no objections. So she kept her as closely under observation
as possible. One day, on returning from a ride, as the carriage passed
into the block where they lived, she saw a woman standing on the step in
front of their residence. She had pulled the bell, and was waiting for a
servant to answer it.

“There is some one at our door,” said Edith.

Mrs. Dinneford leaned across her daughter, and then drew back quickly,
saying,

“It's Mrs. Barker. Tell Henry to drive past. I don't want to see
visitors, and particularly not Mrs. Barker.”

She spoke hurriedly, and with ill-concealed agitation. Edith kept her
eyes on the woman, and saw her go in, but did not tell the driver to
keep on past the house. It was not Mrs. Barker. She knew that very well.
In the next moment their carriage drew up at the door.

“Go on, Henry!” cried Mrs. Dinneford, leaning past her daughter, and
speaking through the window that was open on that side. “Drive down to
Loring's.”

“Not till I get out, Henry,” said Edith, pushing open the door and
stepping to the pavement. Then with a quick movement she shut the door
and ran across the pavement, calling back to the driver as she did so,

“Take mother to Loring's.”

“Stop, Henry!” cried Mrs. Dinneford, and with an alertness that was
surprising sprung from the carriage, and was on the steps of their house
before Edith's violent ring had brought a servant to the door. They
passed in, Edith holding her place just in advance.

“I will see Mrs. Barker,” said Mrs. Dinneford, trying to keep out of her
voice the fear and agitation from which she was suffering. “You can go
up to your room.”

“It isn't Mrs. Barker. You are mistaken.” There was as much of betrayal
in the voice of Edith as in that of her mother. Each was trying to hide
herself from the other, but the veil in both cases was far too thin for
deception.

Mother and daughter entered the parlor together. As they did so a woman
of small stature, and wearing a rusty black dress, arose from a seat
near the window. The moment she saw Edith she drew a heavy dark veil
over her face with a quickness of movement that had in it as much of
discomfiture as surprise.

Mrs. Dinneford was equal to the occasion. The imminent peril in which
she stood calmed the wild tumult within, as the strong wind calms this
turbulent ocean, and gave her thoughts clearness and her mind decision.
Edith saw before the veil fell a startled face, and recognized the
sallow countenance and black, evil eyes, the woman who had once before
called to see her mother.

“Didn't I tell you not to come here, Mrs. Gray?” cried out Mrs.
Dinneford, with an anger that was more real than feigned, advancing
quickly upon the woman as she spoke. “Go!” and she pointed to the door,
“and don't you dare to come here again. I told you when you were here
last time that I wouldn't be bothered with you any longer. I've done all
I ever intend doing. So take yourself away.”

And she pointed again to the door. Mrs. Bray--for it was that
personage--comprehended the situation fully. She was as good an actor as
Mrs. Dinneford, and quite as equal to the occasion. Lifting her hand in
a weak, deprecating way, and then shrinking like one borne down by the
shock of a great disappointment, she moved back from the excited woman
and made her way to the hall, Mrs. Dinneford following and assailing her
in passionate language.

Edith was thrown completely off her guard by this unexpected scene. She
did not stir from the spot where she stood on entering the parlor until
the visitor was at the street door, whither her mother had followed the
retreating figure. She did not hear the woman say in the tone of one who
spoke more in command than entreaty,

“To-morrow at one o'clock, or take the consequences.”

“It will be impossible to-morrow,” Mrs. Dinneford whispered back,
hurriedly; “I have been very ill, and have only just begun to ride out.
It may be a week, but I'll surely come. I'm watched. Go now! go! go!”

And she pushed Mrs. Bray out into the vestibule and shut the door after
her. Mrs. Dinneford did not return to the parlor, but went hastily up to
her own room, locking herself in.

She did not come out until dinner-time, when she made an effort to seem
composed, but Edith saw her hand tremble every time it was lifted. She
drank three glasses of wine during the meal. After dinner she went to
her own apartment immediately, and did not come down again that day.

On the next morning Mrs. Dinneford tried to appear cheerful and
indifferent. But her almost colorless face, pinched about the lips and
nostrils, and the troubled expression that would not go out of her eyes,
betrayed to Edith the intense anxiety and dread that lay beneath the
surface.

Days went by, but Edith had no more signs. Now that her mother was
steadily getting back both bodily strength and mental self-poise, the
veil behind which she was hiding herself, and which had been broken into
rifts here and there during her sickness, grew thicker and thicker. Mrs.
Dinneford had too much at stake not to play her cards with exceeding
care. She knew that Edith was watching her with an intentness that let
nothing escape. Her first care, as soon as she grew strong enough to
have the mastery over herself, was so to control voice, manner and
expression of countenance as not to appear aware of this surveillance.
Her next was to re-establish the old distance between herself and
daughter, which her illness had temporarily bridged over, and her next
was to provide against any more visits from Mrs. Bray.




CHAPTER XIII.



_AS_ for Edith, all doubts and questionings as to her baby's fate were
merged into a settled conviction that it was alive, and that her mother
knew where it was to be found. From her mother's pity and humanity she
had nothing to hope for the child. It had been cruelly cast adrift,
pushed out to die; by what means was cared not, so that it died and left
no trace.

The face of Mrs. Bray had, in the single glance Edith obtained of it,
become photographed in her mind. If she had been an artist, she could
have drawn it from memory so accurately that no one who knew the woman
could have failed to recognize her likeness. Always when in the street
her eyes searched for this face; she never passed a woman of small
stature and poor dark clothing without turning to look at her. Every day
she went out, walking the streets sometimes for hours looking for this
face, but not finding it. Every day she passed certain corners and
localities where she had seen women begging, and whenever she found one
with a baby in her arms would stop to look at the poor starved thing,
and question her about it.

Gradually all her thoughts became absorbed in the condition of poor,
neglected and suffering children. Her attendance at the St. John's
mission sewing-school, which was located in the neighborhood of one
of the worst places in the city, brought her in contact with little
children in such a wretched state of ignorance, destitution and vice
that her heart was moved to deepest pity, intensified by the thought
that ever and anon flashed across her mind: “And my baby may become like
one of these!”

Sometimes this thought would drive her almost to madness. Often she
would become so wild in her suspense as to be on the verge of openly
accusing her mother with having knowledge of her baby's existence and
demanding of her its restoration. But she was held back by the fear that
such an accusation would only shut the door of hope for ever. She had
come to believe her mother capable of almost any wickedness. Pressed
to the wall she would never be if there was any way of escape, and to
prevent such at thing there was nothing so desperate that she would not
do it; and so Edith hesitated and feared to take the doubtful issue.

Week after week and month after month now went on without a single,
occurrence that gave to Edith any new light. Mrs. Dinneford wrought with
her accomplice so effectually that she kept her wholly out of the way.
Often, in going and returning from the mission-school, Edith would
linger about the neighborhood where she had once met her mother, hoping
to see her come out of some one of the houses there, for she had got it
into her mind that the woman called Mrs. Gray lived somewhere in this
locality.

One day, in questioning a child who had come to the sewing-school as to
her home and how she lived, the little girl said something about a baby
that her mother said she knew must have been stolen.

“How old is the baby?” asked Edith, hardly able to keep the tremor out
of her voice.

“It's a little thing,” answered the child. “I don't know how old it is;
maybe it's six months old, or maybe it's a year. It can sit upon the
floor.”

“Why does your mother think it has been stolen?”

“Because two bad girls have got it, and they pay a woman to take care of
it. It doesn't belong to them, she knows. Mother says it would be a good
thing if it died.”

“Why does she say that?”

“Oh she always talks that way about babies--says she's glad when they
die.”

“Is it a boy or a girl?”

“It's a boy baby,” answered the child.

“Does the woman take good care of it?”

“Oh dear, no! She lets it sit on the floor 'most all the time, and it
cries so that I often go up and nurse it. The woman lives in the room
over ours.”

“Where do you live?”

“In Grubb's court.”

“Will you show me the way there after school is over?”

The child looked up into Edith's face with an expression of surprise and
doubt. Edith repeated her question.

“I guess you'd better not go,” was answered, in a voice that meant all
the words expressed.

“Why not?”

“It isn't a good place.”

“But you live there?”

“Yes, but nobody's going to trouble me.”

“Nor me,” said Edith.

“Oh, but you don't know what kind of a place it is, nor what dreadful
people live there.”

“I could get a policeman to go with me, couldn't I?”

“Yes, maybe you could, or Mr. Paulding, the missionary. He goes about
everywhere.”

“Where can I find Mr. Paulding?”

“At the mission in Briar street.”

“You'll show me the way there after school?”

“Oh yes; it isn't a nice place for you to go, but I guess nobody'll
trouble you.”

After the school closed, Edith, guided by the child, made her way to the
Briar st. mission-house. As she entered the narrow street in which it
was situated, the aspect of things was so strange and shocking to her
eyes that she felt a chill creep to her heart. She had never imagined
anything so forlorn and squalid, so wretched and comfortless. Miserable
little hovels, many of them no better than pig-styes, and hardly cleaner
within, were crowded together in all stages of dilapidation. Windows
with scarcely a pane of glass, the chilly air kept out by old hats, bits
of carpet or wads of newspaper, could be seen on all sides, with here
and there, showing some remains of an orderly habit, a broken pane
closed with a smooth piece of paper pasted to the sash. Instinctively
she paused, oppressed by a sense of fear.

“It's only halfway down,” said the child. “We'll 'go quick. I guess
nobody'll speak to you. They're afraid of Mr. Paulding about here. He's
down on 'em if they meddle with anybody that's coming to the mission.”

Edith, thus urged, moved on. She had gone but a few steps when two men
came in sight, advancing toward her. They were of the class to be seen
at all times in that region--debased to the lowest degree, drunken,
ragged, bloated, evil-eyed, capable of any wicked thing. They were
singing when they came in sight, but checked their drunken mirth as soon
as they saw Edith, whose heart sunk again. She stopped, trembling.

“They're only drunk,” said the child. “I don't believe they'll hurt
you.”

Edith rallied herself and walked on, the men coming closer and closer.
She saw them look at each other with leering eyes, and then at her in
a way that made her shiver. When only a few paces distant, they paused,
and with the evident intention of barring her farther progress.

“Good-afternoon, miss,” said one of them, with a low bow. “Can we do
anything for you?”

The pale, frightened face of Edith was noticed by the other, and it
touched some remnant of manhood not yet wholly extinguished.

“Let her alone, you miserable cuss!” he cried, and giving his drunken
companion a shove, sent him staggering across the street. This made the
way clear, and Edith sprang forward, but she had gone only a few feet
when she came face to face with another obstruction even more frightful,
if possible, than the first. A woman with a red, swollen visage, black
eye, soiled, tattered, drunk, with arms wildly extended, came rushing up
to her. The child gave a scream. The wretched creature caught at a shawl
worn by Edith, and was dragging it from her shoulders, when the door of
one of the houses flew open, and a woman came out hastily. Grasping
the assailant, she hurled her across the street with the strength of a
giant.

“We're going to the mission,” said the child.

“It's just down there. Go 'long. I'll stand here and see that no one
meddles with you again.”

Edith faltered her thanks, and went on.

“That's the queen,” said her companion.

“The queen!” Edith's hasty tones betrayed her surprise.

“Yes; it's Norah. They're all afraid of her. I'm glad she saw us. She's
as strong as a man.”

In a few minutes they reached the mission, but in those few minutes
Edith saw more to sadden the heart, more to make it ache for humanity,
than could be described in pages.

The missionary was at home. Edith told him the purpose of her call and
the locality she desired to visit.

“I wanted to go alone,” she remarked, “but this little girl, who is in
my class at the sewing-school, said it wouldn't be safe, and that you
would go with me.”

“I should be sorry to have you go alone into Grubb's court,” said the
missionary, kindly, and with concern in his voice, “for a worse place
can hardly be found in the city--I was going to say in the world. You
will be safe with me, however. But why do you wish to visit Grubb's
court? Perhaps I can do all that is needed.”

“This little girl who lives in there, has been telling me about a
poor neglected baby that her mother says has no doubt been stolen,
and--and--” Edith voice faltered, but she quickly gained steadiness
under a strong effort of will: “I thought perhaps I might be able to
do something for it--to get it into one of the homes, maybe. It is
dreadful, sir, to think of little babies being neglected.”

Mr. Paulding questioned the child who had brought Edith to the
mission-house, and learned from her that the baby was merely boarded by
the woman who had it in charge, and that she sometimes took it out and
sat on the street, begging. The child repeated what she had said to
Edith--that the baby was the property, so to speak, of two abandoned
women, who paid its board.

“I think,” said the missionary, after some reflection, “that if getting
the child out of their hands is your purpose, you had better not go
there at present. Your visit would arouse suspicion; and if the two
women have anything to gain by keeping the child in their possession,
it will be at once taken to a new place. I am moving about in these
localities all the while, and can look in upon the baby without anything
being thought of it.”

This seemed so reasonable that Edith, who could not get over the nervous
tremors occasioned by what she had already seen and encountered, readily
consented to leave the matter for the present in Mr. Paulding's hands.

“If you will come here to-morrow,” said the missionary, “I will tell you
all I can about the baby.”

Out of a region where disease, want and crime shrunk from common
observation, and sin and death held high carnival, Edith hurried with
trembling feet, and heart beating so heavily that she could hear it
throb, the considerate missionary going with her until she had crossed
the boundary of this morally infected district.

Mr. Dinneford met Edith at the door on her arrival home.

“My child,” he exclaimed as he looked into her face, back to which the
color had not returned since her fright in Briar street, “are you sick?”

“I don't feel very well;” and she tried to pass him hastily in the hall
as they entered the house together. But he laid his hand on her arm
and held her back gently, then drew her into the parlor. She sat down,
trembling, weak and faint. Mr. Dinneford waited for some moments,
looking at her with a tender concern, before speaking.

“Where have you been, my dear?” he asked, at length.

After a little hesitation, Edith told her father about her visit to
Briar street and the shock she had received.

“You were wrong,” he answered, gravely. “It is most fortunate for you
that you took the child's advice and called at the mission. If you had
gone to Grubb's court alone, you might not have come out alive.”

“Oh no, father! It can't be so bad as that.”

“It is just as bad as that,” he replied, with a troubled face and
manner. “Grubb's court is one of the traps into which unwary victims
are drawn that they may be plundered. It is as much out of common
observation almost as the lair of a wild beast in some deep wilderness.
I have heard it described by those who have been there under protection
of the police, and shudder to think of the narrow escape you have made.
I don't want you to go into that vile district again. It is no place for
such as you.”

“There's a poor little baby there,” said Edith, her voice trembling and
tears filling her eyes. Then, after a brief struggle with her feelings,
she threw herself upon her father, sobbing out, “And oh, father, it may
be my baby!”

“My poor child,” said Mr. Dinneford, not able to keep his voice
firm--“my poor, poor child! It is all a wild dream, the suggestion of
evil spirits who delight in torment.”

“What became of my baby, father? Can you tell me?”

“It died, Edith dear. We know that,” returned her father, trying to
speak very confidently. But the doubt in his own mind betrayed itself.

“Do you know it?” she asked, rising and confronting her father.

“I didn't actually see it die. But--but--”

“You know no more about it than I do,” said Edith; “if you did, you
might set my heart at rest with a word. But you cannot. And so I am left
to my wild fears, that grow stronger every day. Oh, father, help me, if
you can. I must have certainty, or I shall lose my reason.”

“If you don't give up this wild fancy, you surely will,” answered Mr.
Dinneford, in a distressed voice.

“If I were to shut myself up and do nothing,” said Edith, with greater
calmness, “I would be in a madhouse before a week went by. My safety
lies in getting down to the truth of this wild fancy, as you call it. It
has taken such possession of me that nothing but certainty can give me
rest. Will you help me?”

“How can I help you? I have no clue to this sad mystery.”

“Mystery! Then you are as much in the dark as I am--know no more of what
became of my baby than I do! Oh, father, how could you let such a thing
be done, and ask no questions--such a cruel and terrible thing--and I
lying helpless and dumb? Oh, father, my innocent baby cast out like a
dog to perish--nay, worse, like a lamb among wolves to be torn by their
cruel teeth--and no one to put forth a hand to save! If I only knew that
he was dead! If I could find his little grave and comfort my heart over
it!”

Weak, naturally good men, like Mr. Dinneford, often permit great wrongs
to be done in shrinking from conflict and evading the sterner duties of
life. They are often the faithless guardians of immortal trusts.

There was a tone of accusation and rebuke in Edith's voice that smote
painfully on her father's heart. He answered feebly:

“What could I do? How should I know that anything wrong was being done?
You were very ill, and the baby was sent away to be nursed, and then I
was told that it was dead.”

“Oh, father! Sent away without your seeing it! My baby! Your little
grandson! Oh, father!”

“But you know, dear, in what a temper of mind your mother was--how
impossible it is for me to do anything with her when she once sets
herself to do a thing.”

“Even if it be murder!” said Edith, in a hoarse whisper.

“Hush, hush, my child! You must not speak so,” returned the agitated
father.

A silence fell between them. A wall of separation began to grow up.
Edith arose, and was moving from the room.

“My daughter!” There was a sob in the father's voice.

Edith stopped.

“My daughter, we must not part yet. Come back; sit down with me, and let
us talk more calmly. What is past cannot be changed. It is with the now
of this unhappy business that we have to do.”

Edith came back and sat down again, her father taking a seat beside her.

“That is just it,” she answered, with a steadiness of tone and manner
that showed how great was the self-control she was able to exert. “It
is with the now of this unhappy affair that we have to do. If I spoke
strongly of the past, it was that a higher and intenser life might be
given to present duty.”

“Let there be no distance between us. Let no wall of separation grow
up,” said Mr. Dinneford, tenderly. “I cannot bear to think of this.
Confide in me, consult with me. I will help you in all possible ways to
solve this mystery. But do not again venture alone into that dreadful
place. I will go with you if you think any good will come of it.”

“I must see Mr. Paulding in the morning,” said Edith, with calm
decision.

“Then I will go with you,” returned Mr. Dinneford.

“Thank you, father;” and she kissed him. “Until then nothing more can
be done.” She kissed him again, and then went to her own room. After
locking the door she sank on her knees, leaning forward, with her face
buried in the cushion of a chair, and did not rise for a long time.




CHAPTER XIV.



_ON_ the next morning, after some persuasion, Edith consented to
postpone her visit to Grubb's court until after her father had seen Mr.
Paulding, the missionary.

“Let me go first and gain what information I can,” he urged. “It may
save you a fruitless errand.”

It was not without a feeling of almost unconquerable repugnance that
Mr. Dinneford took his way to the mission-house, in Briar street. His
tastes, his habits and his naturally kind and sensitive feelings all
made him shrink from personal contact with suffering and degradation.
He gave much time and care to the good work of helping the poor and the
wretched, but did his work in boards and on committees, rather than in
the presence of the needy and suffering. He was not one of those who
would pass over to the other side and leave a wounded traveler to
perish, but he would avoid the road to Jericho, if he thought it likely
any such painful incident would meet him in the way and shock his fine
sensibilities. He was willing to work for the downcast, the wronged, the
suffering and the vile, but preferred doing so at a distance, and not in
immediate contact. Thus it happened that, although one of the managers
of the Briar street mission and familiar with its work in a general way,
he had never been at the mission-house--had never, in fact, set his foot
within the morally plague-stricken district in which it stood. He had
often been urged to go, but could not overcome his reluctance to meet
humanity face to face in its sadder and more degraded aspects.

Now a necessity was upon him, and he had to go. It was about ten o'clock
in the morning when, at almost a single step, he passed from what seemed
paradise to purgatory, the sudden contrast was so great. There were but
few persons in the little street; where the mission was situated at that
early hour, and most of these were children--poor, half-clothed, dirty,
wan-faced, keen-eyed and alert bits of humanity, older by far than their
natural years, few of them possessing any higher sense of right and
wrong than young savages. The night's late orgies or crimes had left
most of their elders in a heavy morning sleep, from which they did
not usually awaken before midday. Here and there one and another came
creeping out, impelled by a thirst no water could quench. Now it was a
bloated, wild-eyed man, dirty and forlorn beyond description,
shambling into sight, but disappearing in a moment or two in one of the
dram-shops, whose name was legion, and now it was a woman with the
angel all gone out of her face, barefooted, blotched, coarse, red-eyed,
bruised and awfully disfigured by her vicious, drunken life. Her steps
too made haste to the dram-shop.

Such houses for men and women to live in as now stretched before
his eyes in long dreary rows Mr. Dinneford had never seen, except in
isolated cases of vice and squalor. To say that he was shocked would but
faintly express his feelings. Hurrying along, he soon came in sight of
the mission. At this moment a jar broke the quiet of the scene. Just
beyond the mission-house two women suddenly made their appearance, one
of them pushing the other out upon the street. Their angry cries rent
the air, filling it with profane and obscene oaths. They struggled
together for a little while, and then one of them, a woman with gray
hair and not less than sixty years of age, fell across the curb with her
head on the cobble-stones.

As if a sorcerer had stamped his foot, a hundred wretched creatures,
mostly women and children, seemed to spring up from the ground. It was
like a phantasy. They gathered about the prostrate woman, laughing and
jeering. A policeman who was standing at the corner a little way off
came up leisurely, and pushing the motley crew aside, looked down at the
prostrate woman.

“Oh, it's you again!” he said, in a tone of annoyance, taking hold of
one arm and raising her so that she sat on the curb-stone. Mr. Dinneford
now saw her face distinctly; it was that of an old woman, but red,
swollen and terribly marred. Her thin gray hair had fallen over her
shoulders, and gave her a wild and crazy look.

“Come,” said the policeman, drawing on the woman's arm and trying to
raise her from the ground. But she would not move.

“Come,” he said, more imperatively.

“Nature you going to do with me?” she demanded.

“I'm going to lock you up. So come along. Have had enough of you about
here. Always drunk and in a row with somebody.”

Her resistance was making the policeman angry.

“It'll take two like you to do that,” returned the woman, in a spiteful
voice, swearing foully at the same time.

At this a cheer arose from the crowd. A negro with a push-cart came
along at the moment.

“Here! I want you,” called the policeman.

The negro pretended not to hear, and the policeman had to threaten him
before he would stop.

Seeing the cart, the drunken woman threw herself back upon the pavement
and set every muscle to a rigid strain. And now came one of those
shocking scenes--too familiar, alas! in portions of our large Christian
cities--at which everything pure and merciful and holy in our nature
revolts: a gray-haired old woman, so debased by drink and an evil life
that all sense of shame and degradation had been extinguished, fighting
with a policeman, and for a time showing superior strength, swearing
vilely, her face distorted with passion, and a crowd made up chiefly
of women as vile and degraded as herself, and of all ages, and colors,
laughing, shouting and enjoying the scene intensely.

At last, by aid of the negro, the woman was lifted into the cart and
thrown down upon the floor, her head striking one of the sides with a
sickening _thud_. She still swore and struggled, and had to be held down
by the policeman, who stood over her, while the cart was pushed off to
the nearest station-house, the excited crowd following with shouts and
merry huzzas.

Mr. Dinneford was standing in a maze, shocked and distressed by this
little episode, when a man at his side said in a grave, quiet voice,

“I doubt if you could see a sight just like that anywhere else in all
Christendom.” Then added, as he extended his hand,

“I am glad to see you here, Mr. Dinneford.”

“Oh, Mr. Paulding!” and Mr. Dinneford put out his hand and grasped that
of the missionary with a nervous grip. “This is awful! I am sixty years
old, but anything so shocking my eyes have not before looked upon.”

“We see things worse than this every day,” said the missionary. “It is
only one of the angry boils on the surface, and tells of the corrupt
and vicious blood within. But I am right glad to find you here, Mr.
Dinneford. Unless you see these things with your own eyes, it is
impossible for you to comprehend the condition of affairs in this by-way
to hell.”

“Hell, itself, better say,” returned Mr. Dinneford. “It is hell pushing
itself into visible manifestation--hell establishing itself on the
earth, and organizing its forces for the destruction of human souls,
while the churches are too busy enlarging their phylacteries and making
broader and more attractive the hems of their garments to take note of
this fatal vantage-ground acquired by the enemy.”

Mr. Dinneford stood and looked around him in a dazed sort of way.

“Is Grubb's court near this?” he asked, recollecting the errand upon
which he had come.

“Yes.”

“A young lady called to see you yesterday afternoon to ask about a child
in that court?”

“Oh yes! You know the lady?”

“She is my daughter. One of the poor children in her sewing-class
told her of a neglected baby in Grubb's court, and so drew upon her
sympathies that she started to go there, but was warned by the child
that it would be dangerous for a young lady like her to be seen in that
den of thieves and harlots, and so she came to you. And now I am here in
her stead to get your report about the baby. I would not consent to her
visiting this place again.”

Mr. Paulding took his visitor into the mission-house, near which they
were standing. After they were seated, he said,

“I have seen the baby about which your daughter wished me to make
inquiry. The woman who has the care of it is a vile creature, well known
in this region--drunken and vicious. She said at first that it was her
own baby, but afterward admitted that she didn't know who its mother
was, and that she was paid for taking care of it. I found out, after
a good deal of talking round, and an interview with the mother of the
child who is in your daughter's sewing-class, that a girl of notoriously
bad character, named Pinky Swett, pays the baby's board. There's a
mystery about the child, and I am of the opinion that it has been
stolen, or is known to be the offcast of some respectable family. The
woman who has the care of it was suspicious, and seemed annoyed at my
questions.”

“Is it a boy?” asked Mr. Dinneford.

“Yes, and has a finely-formed head and a pair of large, clear, hazel
eyes. Evidently it is of good parentage. The vicious, the sensual and
the depraved mark their offspring with the unmistakable signs of their
moral depravity. You cannot mistake them. But this baby has in its
poor, wasted, suffering little face, in its well-balanced head and deep,
almost spiritual eyes, the signs of a better origin.”

“It ought at once to be taken away from the woman,” said Mr. Dinneford,
in a very decided manner.

“Who is to take it?” asked the missionary.

Mr. Dinneford was silent.

“Neither you nor I have any authority to do so. If I were to see it cast
out upon the street, I might have it sent to the almshouse; but until I
find it abandoned or shamefully abused, I have no right to interfere.”

“I would like to see the baby,” said Mr. Dinneford, on whose mind
painful suggestions akin to those that were so disturbing his daughter
were beginning to intrude themselves.

“It would hardly be prudent to go there to-day,” said Mr. Paulding.

“Why not?”

“It would arouse suspicion; and if there is anything wrong, the baby
would drop out of sight. You would not find it if you went again. These
people are like birds with their wings half lifted, and fly away at the
first warning of danger. As it is, I fear my visit and inquiries will be
quite sufficient to the cause the child's removal to another place.”

Mr. Dinneford mused for a while:

“There ought to be some way to reach a case like this, and there is,
I am sure. From what you say, it is more than probable that this poor
little waif may have drifted out of some pleasant home, where love would
bless it with the tenderest care, into this hell of neglect and cruelty.
It should be rescued on the instant. It is my duty--it is yours--to see
that it is done, and that without delay. I will go at once to the mayor
and state the case. He will send an officer with me, I know, and we will
take the child by force. If its real mother then comes forward and shows
herself at all worthy to have the care of it, well; if not, I will see
that it is taken care of. I know where to place it.”

To this proposition Mr. Paulding had no objection to offer.

“If you take that course, and act promptly, you can no doubt get
possession of the poor thing. Indeed, sir”--and the missionary spoke
with much earnestness--“if men of influence like yourself would come
here and look the evil of suffering and neglected children in the face,
and then do what they could to destroy that evil, there would soon be
joy in heaven over the good work accomplished by their hands. I could
give you a list of ten or twenty influential citizens whose will would
be next to law in a matter like this who could in a month, if they put
heart and hand to it, do such a work for humanity here as would make the
angels glad. But they are too busy with their great enterprises to give
thought and effort to a work like this.”

A shadow fell across the missionary's face. There was a tone of
discouragement in his voice.

“The great question is _what_ to do,” said Mr. Dinneford. “There are no
problems so hard to solve as these problems of social evil. If men and
women choose to debase themselves, who is to hinder? The vicious heart
seeks a vicious life. While the heart is depraved the life will be evil.
So long as the fountain is corrupt the water will be foul.”

“There is a side to all this that most people do not consider,” answered
Mr. Paulding. “Self-hurt is one thing, hurt of the neighbor quite
another. It may be questioned whether society has a right to touch the
individual freedom of a member in anything that affects himself alone.
But the moment he begins to hurt his neighbor, whether from ill-will
or for gain, then it is the duty of society to restrain him. The common
weal demands this, to say nothing of Christian obligation. If a man were
to set up an exhibition in our city dangerous to life and limb, but
so fascinating as to attract large numbers to witness and participate
therein, and if hundreds were maimed or killed every year, do you think
any one would question the right of our authorities to repress it? And
yet to-day there are in our city more than twenty thousand persons who
live by doing things a thousand times more hurtful to the people than
any such exhibition could possibly be. And what is marvelous to think
of, the larger part of these persons are actually licensed by the State
to get gain by hurting, depraving and destroying the people. Think of
it, Mr. Dinneford! The whole question lies in a nutshell. There is
no difficulty about the problem. Restrain men from doing harm to each
other, and the work is more than half done.”

“Is not the law all the while doing this?”

“The law,” was answered, “is weakly dealing with effect--how weakly let
prison and police statistics show. Forty thousand arrests in our city
for a single year, and the cause of these arrests clearly traced to the
liquor licenses granted to five or six thousand persons to make money
by debasing and degrading the people. If all of these were engaged in
useful employments, serving, as every true citizen is bound to do, the
common good, do you think we should have so sad and sickening a record?
No, sir! We must go back to the causes of things. Nothing but radical
work will do.”

“You think, then,” said Mr. Dinneford, “that the true remedy for all
these dreadful social evils lies in restrictive legislation?”

“Restrictive only on the principles of eternal right,” answered the
missionary. “Man's freedom over himself must not be touched. Only his
freedom to hurt his neighbor must be abridged. Here society has a right
to put bonds on its members--to say to each individual, You are free to
do anything by which your neighbor is served, but nothing to harm him.
Here is where the discrimination must be made; and when the mass of the
people come to see this, we shall have the beginning of a new day. There
will then be hope for such poor wretches as crowd this region; or if
most of them are so far lost as to be without hope, their places,
when they die, will not be filled with new recruits for the army of
perdition.”

“If the laws we now have were only executed,” said Mr. Dinneford,
“there might be hope in our legislative restrictions. But the people
are defrauded of justice through defects in its machinery. There are
combinations to defeat good laws. There are men holding high office
notoriously in league with scoundrels who prey upon the people. Through
these, justice perpetually fails.”

“The people are alone to blame,” replied the missionary. “Each is busy
with his farm and his merchandise with his own affairs, regardless
of his neighbor. The common good is nothing, so that his own good is
served. Each weakly folds his hands and is sorry when these troublesome
questions are brought to his notice, but doesn't see that he can do
anything. Nor can the people, unless some strong and influential leaders
rally them, and, like great generals, lead them to the battle. As I said
a little while ago, there are ten or twenty men in this city who, if
they could be made to feel their high responsibility--who, if they could
be induced to look away for a brief period from their great enterprises
and concentrate thought and effort upon these questions of social
evil, abuse of justice and violations of law--would in a single month
inaugurate reforms and set agencies to work that would soon produce
marvelous changes. They need not touch the rottenness of this half-dead
carcass with knife or poultice. Only let them cut off the sources
of pollution and disease, and the purified air will do the work of
restoration where moral vitality remains, or hasten the end in those who
are debased beyond hope.”

“What could these men do? Where would their work begin?” asked Mr.
Dinneford.

“Their own intelligence would soon discover the way to do this work if
their hearts were in it. Men who can organize and successfully conduct
great financial and industrial enterprises, who know how to control
the wealth and power of the country and lead the people almost at will,
would hardly be at fault in the adjustment of a matter like this.
What would be the money influence of 'whisky rings' and gambling
associations, set against the social and money influence of these
men? Nothing, sir, nothing! Do you think we should long have over six
thousand bars and nearly four hundred lottery-policy shops in our city
if the men to whom I refer were to take the matter in hand?”

“Are there so many policy-shops?” asked Mr. Dinneford, in surprise.

“There may be more. You will find them by scores in every locality
where poor and ignorant people are crowded together, sucking out
their substance, and in the neighborhood of all the market-houses and
manufactories, gathering in spoil. The harm they are doing is beyond
computation. The men who control this unlawful business are rich and
closely organized. They gather in their dishonest gains at the rate of
hundreds of thousands of dollars every year, and know how and where
to use this money for the protection of their agents in the work of
defrauding the people, and the people are helpless because our men
of wealth and influence have no time to give to public justice or the
suppression of great social wrongs. With them, as things now are, rests
the chief responsibility. They have the intelligence, the wealth and
the public confidence, and are fully equal to the task if they will put
their hands to the work. Let them but lift the standard and sound the
trumpet of reform, and the people will rally instantly at the call.
It must not be a mere spasmodic effort--a public meeting with wordy
resolutions and strong speeches only--but organized work based on true
principles of social order and the just rights of the people.”

“You are very much in earnest about this matter,” said Mr. Dinneford,
seeing how excited the missionary had grown.

“And so would you and every other good citizen become if, standing
face to face, as I do daily, with this awful debasement and crime and
suffering, you were able to comprehend something of its real character.
If I could get the influential citizens to whom I have referred to come
here and see for themselves, to look upon this pandemonium in their
midst and take in an adequate idea of its character, significance and
aggressive force, there would be some hope of making them see their
duty, of arousing them to action. But they stand aloof, busy with
personal and material interest, while thousands of men, women and
children are yearly destroyed, soul and body, through their indifference
to duty and ignorance of their fellows' suffering.”

“It is easy to say such things,” answered Mr. Dinneford, who felt the
remarks of Mr. Paulding as almost personal.

“Yes, it is easy to say them,” returned the missionary, his voice
dropping to a lower key, “and it may be of little use to say them. I am
sometimes almost in despair, standing so nearly alone as I do with my
feet on the very brink of this devastating flood of evil, and getting
back only faint echoes to my calls for help. But when year after year
I see some sheaves coming in as the reward of my efforts and of the few
noble hearts that work with me, I thank God and take courage, and I lift
my voice and call more loudly for help, trusting that I may be heard by
some who, if they would only come up to the help of the Lord against the
mighty, would scatter his foes like chaff on the threshing-floor. But
I am holding you back from your purpose to visit the mayor; I think
you had better act promptly if you would get possession of the child.
I shall be interested in the result, and will take it as a favor if you
will call at the mission again.”




CHAPTER XV.



_WHEN_ Mr. Dinneford and the policeman sent by the mayor at his
solicitation visited Grubb's court, the baby was not to be found. The
room in which it had been seen by Mr. Paulding was vacant. Such a room
as it was!--low and narrow, with bare, blackened walls, the single
window having scarcely two whole panes of glass, the air loaded with the
foulness that exhaled from the filth-covered floor, the only furniture a
rough box and a dirty old straw bed lying in a corner.

As Mr. Dinneford stood at the door of this room and inhaled its fetid
air, he grew sick, almost faint. Stepping back, with a shocked and
disgusted look on his face, he said to the policeman,

“There must be a mistake. This cannot be the room.”

Two or three children and a coarse, half-clothed woman, seeing a
gentleman going into the house accompanied by a policeman, had followed
them closely up stairs.

“Who lives in this room?” asked the policeman, addressing the woman.

“Don't know as anybody lives there now,” she replied, with evident
evasion.

“Who did live here?” demanded the policeman.

“Oh, lots!” returned the woman, curtly.

“I want to know who lived here last,” said the policeman, a little
sternly.

“Can't say--never keep the run of 'em,” answered the woman, with more
indifference than she felt. “Goin' and comin' all the while. Maybe it
was Poll Davis.”

“Had she a baby?”

The woman gave a vulgar laugh as she replied: “I rather think not.”

“It was Moll Fling,” said one of the children, “and she had a baby.”

“When was she here last?” inquired the policeman.

The woman, unseen by the latter, raised her fist and threatened the
child, who did not seem to be in the least afraid of her, for she
answered promptly:

“She went away about an hour ago.”

“And took the baby?”

“Yes. You see Mr. Paulding was here asking about the baby, and she got
scared.”

“Why should that scare her?”

“I don't know, only it isn't her baby.”

“How do you know that?”

“'Cause it isn't--I know it isn't. She's paid to take care of it.”

“Who by?”

“Pinky Swett.”

“Who's Pinky Swett?”

“Don't you know Pinky Swett?” and the child seemed half surprised.

“Where does Pinky Swett live?” asked the policeman.

“She did live next door for a while, but I don't know where she's gone.”

Nothing beyond this could be ascertained. But having learned the names
of the women who had possession of the child, the policeman said there
would be no difficulty about discovering them. It might take a little
time, but they could not escape the vigilance of the police.

With this assurance, Mr. Dinneford hastened from the polluted air of
Grubb's court, and made his way to the mission in Briar street, in order
to have some further conference with Mr. Paulding.

“As I feared,” said the missionary, on learning that the baby could not
be found. “These creatures are as keen of scent as Indians, and know
the smallest sign of danger. It is very plain that there is something
wrong--that these women have no natural right to the child, and that
they are not using it to beg with.”

“Do you know a woman called Pinky Swett?” asked the policeman.

“I've heard of her, but do not know her by sight. She bears a hard
reputation even here, and adds to her many evil accomplishments the
special one of adroit robbery. A victim lured to her den rarely escapes
without loss of watch or pocket-book. And not one in a hundred dares to
give information, for this would expose him to the public, and so her
crimes are covered. Pinky Swett is not the one to bother herself about
a baby unless its parentage be known, and not then unless the knowledge
can be turned to advantage.”

“The first thing to be done, then, is to find this woman,” said the
policeman.

“That will not be very hard work. But finding the baby, if she thinks
you are after it, would not be so easy,” returned Mr. Paulding. “She's
as cunning as a fox.”

“We shall see. If the chief of police undertakes to find the baby, it
won't be out of sight long. You'd better confer with the mayor again,”
 added the policeman, addressing Mr. Dinneford.

“I will do so without delay,” returned that gentleman.

“I hope to see you here again soon,” said the missionary as Mr.
Dinneford was about going. “If I can help you in any way, I shall do so
gladly.”

“I have no doubt but that you can render good service.” Then, in half
apology, and to conceal the real concern at his heart, Mr. Dinneford
added, “Somehow, and strangely enough when I come to think of it, I have
allowed myself to get drawn into this thing, and once in, the natural
persistence of my character leads me to go on to the end. I am one of
those who cannot bear to give up or acknowledge a defeat; and so, having
set my hand to this work, I am going to see it through.”

When the little girl who had taken Edith to the mission-house in Briar
street got home and told her story, there was a ripple of excitement in
that part of Grubb's court where she lived, and a new interest was felt
in the poor neglected baby. Mr. Paulding's visit and inquiries added to
this interest. It had been several days since Pinky Swett's last visit
to the child to see that it was safe. On the morning after Edith's call
at the mission she came in about ten o'clock, and heard the news. In
less than twenty minutes the child and the woman who had charge of it
both disappeared from Grubb's court. Pinky sent them to her own room,
not many squares distant, and then drew from the little girl who was in
Edith's sewing-class all she knew about that young lady. It was not much
that the child could tell. She was very sweet and good and handsome, and
wore such beautiful clothes, was so kind and patient with the girls, but
she did not remember her name, thought it was Edith.

“Now, see here,” said Pinky, and she put some money into the child's
hand; “I want you to find out for me what her name is and where she
lives. Mind, you must be very careful to remember.”

“What do you want to know for?” asked the little girl.

“That's none of your business. Do what I tell you,” returned Pinky, with
impatience; “and if you do it right, I'll give you a quarter more. When
do you go again?”

“Next week, on Thursday.”

“Not till next Thursday!” exclaimed Pinky, in a tone of disappointment.

“The school's only once a week.”

Pinky chafed a good deal, but it was of no use; she must wait.

“You'll be sure and go next Thursday?” she said.

“If Mother lets me,” replied the child.

“Oh, I'll see to that; I'll make her let you. What time does the school
go in?”

“At three o'clock.”

“Very well. You wait for me. I'll come round here at half-past two, and
go with you. I want to see the young lady. They'll let me come into the
school and learn to sew, won't they?”

“I don't know; you're too big, and you don't want to learn.”

“How do you know I don't?”

“Because I do.”

Pinky laughed, and then said,

“You'll wait for me?”

“Yes, if mother says so.”

“All right;” and Pinky hurried away to take measures for hiding the baby
from a search that she felt almost sure was about being made. The first
thing she did was to soundly abuse the woman in whose care she had
placed the hapless child for her neglect and ill treatment, both of
which were too manifest, and then to send her away under the new aspect
of affairs she did not mean to trust this woman, nor indeed to trust
anybody who knew anything of the inquiries which had been made about the
child. A new nurse must be found, and she must live as far away from the
old locality as possible. Pinky was not one inclined to put things off.
Thought and act were always close together. Scarcely had the woman been
gone ten minutes, before, bundling the baby in a shawl, she started off
to find a safer hiding-place. This time she was more careful about the
character and habits of the person selected for a nurse, and the baby's
condition was greatly improved. The woman in whose charge she placed it
was poor, but neither drunken nor depraved. Pinky arranged with her to
take the care of it for two dollars a week, and supplied it with clean
and comfortable clothing. Even she, wicked and vile as she was, could
not help being touched by the change that appeared in the baby's
shrunken face, and in its sad but beautiful eyes, after its wasted
little body had been cleansed and clothed in clean, warm garments and it
had taken its fill of nourishing food.

“It's a shame, the way it has been abused,” said Pinky, speaking from an
impulse of kindness, such as rarely swelled in her evil heart.

“A crying shame,” answered the woman as she drew the baby close against
her bosom and gazed down upon its pitiful face, and into the large brown
eyes that were lifted to hers in mute appeal.

The real motherly tenderness that was in this woman's heart was quickly
perceived by the child, who did not move its eyes from hers, but lay
perfectly still, gazing up at her in a kind of easeful rest such as it
had never before known. She spoke to it in loving tones, touched its
thin cheeks with her finger in playful caresses, kissed it on its lips
and forehead, hugged it to her bosom; and still the eyes were fixed on
hers in a strange baby-wonder, though not the faintest glinting of a
smile played on its lips or over its serious face. Had it never learned
to smile?

At last the poor thin lips curved a little, crushing out the lines of
suffering, and into the eyes there came a loving glance in place of the
fixed, wondering look that was almost a stare. A slight lifting of the
hands, a motion of the head, a thrill through the whole body came next,
and then a tender cooing sound.

“Did you ever see such beautiful eyes?” said the woman. “It will be a
splendid baby when it has picked up a little.”

“Let it pick up as fast as it can,” returned Pinky; “but mind what I
say: you are to be mum. Here's your pay for the first week, and you
shall have it fair and square always. Call it your own baby, if you
will, or your grandson. Yes, that's better. He's the child of your dead
daughter, just sent to you from somewhere out of town. So take good
care of him, and keep your mouth shut. I'll be round again in a little
while.”

And with this injunction Pinky went away. On the next Thursday she
visited the St. John's mission sewing-school in company with the little
girl from Grubb's court, but greatly to her disappointment, Edith did
not make her appearance. There were four or five ladies in attendance
on the school, which, under the superintendence of one of them, a woman
past middle life, with a pale, serious face and a voice clear and sweet,
was conducted with an order and decorum not often maintained among a
class of children such as were there gathered together.

It was a long time since Pinky had found herself so repressed and ill
at ease. There was a spiritual atmosphere in the place that did not
vitalize her blood. She felt a sense of constriction and suffocation.
She had taken her seat in the class taught usually by Edith, with the
intention of studying that young lady and finding out all she could
about her, not doubting her ability to act the part in hand with perfect
self-possession. But she had not been in the room a minute before
confidence began to die, and very soon she found herself ill at ease and
conscious of being out of her place. The bold, bad woman felt weak and
abashed. An unseen sphere of purity and Christian love surrounded and
touched her soul with as palpable an impression as outward things give
to the body. She had something of the inward distress and pain a devil
would feel if lifted into the pure air of heaven, and the same desire
to escape and plunge back into the dense and impure atmosphere in
which evil finds its life and enjoyment. If she had come with any good
purpose, it would have been different, but evil, and only evil, was in
her heart; and when this felt the sphere of love and purity, her breast
was constricted and life seemed going out of her.

It was little less than torture to Pinky for the short time she
remained. As soon as she was satisfied that Edith would not be there,
she threw down the garment on which she had been pretending to sew, and
almost ran from the room.

“Who is that girl?” asked the lady who was teaching the class, looking
in some surprise after the hurrying figure.

“It's Pinky Swett,” answered the child from Grubb's court. “She wanted
to see our teacher.”

“Who is your regular teacher?” was inquired.

“Don't remember her name.”

“It's Edith,” spoke up one of the girls. “Mrs. Martin called her that.”

“What did this Pinky Swett want to see her about?”

“Don't know,” answered the child as she remembered the money Pinky had
given her and the promise of more.

The teacher questioned no further, but went on with her work in the
class.




CHAPTER XVI.



_IT_ was past midday when Mr. Dinneford returned home after his
fruitless search. Edith, who had been waiting for hours in restless
suspense, heard his step in the hall, and ran down to meet him.

“Did you see the baby?”' she asked, trying to keep her agitation down.

Mr. Dinneford only shook his head,

“Why, not, father?” Her voice choked.

“It could not be found.”

“You saw Mr. Paulding?”

“Yes.”

“Didn't he find the baby?”

“Oh yes. But when I went to Grubb's court this morning, it was not
there, and no one could or would give any information about it. As the
missionary feared, those having possession of the baby had taken alarm
and removed it to another place. But I have seen the mayor and some of
the police, and got them interested. It will not be possible to hide the
child for any length of time.”

“You said that Mr. Paulding saw it?”

“Yes.”

“What did he say?” Edith's voice trembled as she asked the question.

“He thinks there is something wrong.”

“Did he tell you how the baby looked?”

“He said that it had large, beautiful brown eyes.”

Edith clasped her hands, and drew them tightly against her bosom.

“Oh, father! if it should be my baby!”

“My dear, dear child,” said Mr. Dinneford, putting his arms about Edith
and holding her tightly, “you torture yourself with a wild dream. The
thing is impossible.”

“It is somebody's baby,” sobbed Edith, her face on her father's breast,
“and it may be mine. Who knows?”

“We will do our best to find it,” returned Mr. Dinneford, “and then do
what Christian charity demands. I am in earnest so far, and will leave
nothing undone, you may rest assured. The police have the mayor's
instructions to find the baby and give it into my care, and I do not
think we shall have long to wait.”

An ear they thought not of, heard all this. Mrs. Dinneford's suspicions
had been aroused by many things in Edith's manner and conduct of late,
and she had watched her every look and word and movement with a keenness
of observation that let nothing escape. Careful as her husband and
daughter were in their interviews, it was impossible to conceal anything
from eyes that never failed in watchfulness. An unguarded word here, a
look of mutual intelligence there, a sudden silence when she appeared,
an unusual soberness of demeanor and evident absorbed interest in
something they were careful to conceal, had the effect to quicken all
Mrs. Dinneford's alarms and suspicions.

She had seen from the top of the stairs a brief but excited interview
pass between Edith and her father as the latter stood in the vestibule
that morning, and she had noticed the almost wild look on her daughter's
face as she hastened back along the hall and ran up to her room. Here
she stayed alone for over an hour, and then came down to the parlor,
where she remained restless, moving about or standing by the window for
a greater part of the morning.

There was something more than usual on hand. Guilt in its guesses came
near the truth. What could all this mean, if it had not something to
do with the cast-off baby? Certainty at last came. She was in the
dining-room when Edith ran down to meet her father in the hall, and
slipped noiselessly and unobserved into one of the parlors, where,
concealed by a curtain, she heard everything that passed between her
husband and daughter.

Still as death she stood, holding down the strong pulses of her heart.
From the hall Edith and her father turned into one of the parlors--the
same in which Mrs. Dinneford was concealed behind the curtain--and sat
down.

“It had large brown eyes?” said Edith, a yearning tenderness in her
voice.

“Yes, and a finely-formed bead, showing good parentage,” returned the
father.

“Didn't you find out who the women were--the two bad women the little
girl told me about? If we had their names, the police could find them.
The little girl's mother must know who they are.”

“We have the name of one of them,” said Mr. Dinneford. “She is called
Pinky Swett, and it can't be long before the police are on her track.
She is said to be a desperate character. Nothing more can be done now;
we must wait until the police work up the affair. I will call at the
mayor's office in the morning and find out what has been done.”

Mrs. Dinneford heard no more. The bell rang, and her husband and
daughter left the parlor and went up stairs. The moment they were beyond
observation she glided noiselessly through the hall, and reached her
chamber without being noticed. Soon afterward she came down dressed for
visiting, and went out hastily, her veil closely drawn. Her manner was
hurried. Descending the steps, she stood for a single moment, as if
hesitating which way to go, and then moved off rapidly. Soon she had
passed out of the fashionable neighborhood in which she lived. After
this she walked more slowly, and with the air of one whose mind was
in doubt or hesitation. Once she stopped, and turning about, slowly
retraced her steps for the distance of a square. Then she wheeled
around, as if from some new and strong resolve, and went on again. At
last she paused before a respectable-looking house of moderate size in a
neighborhood remote from the busier and more thronged parts of the city.
The shutters were all bowed down to the parlor, and the house had a
quiet, unobtrusive look. Mrs. Dinneford gave a quick, anxious glance up
and down the street, and then hurriedly ascended the steps and rang the
bell.

“Is Mrs. Hoyt in?” she asked of a stupid-looking girl who came to the
door.

“Yes, ma'am,” was answered.

“Tell her a lady wants to see her;” and she passed into the
plainly-furnished parlor. There were no pictures on the walls nor
ornaments on the mantel-piece, nor any evidence of taste--nothing
home-like--in the shadowed room, the atmosphere of which was close and
heavy. She waited here for a few moments, when there was a rustle of
garments and the sound of light, quick feet on the stairs. A small,
dark-eyed, sallow-faced woman entered the parlor.

“Mrs. Bray--no, Mrs. Hoyt.”

“Mrs. Dinneford;” and the two women stood face to face for a few
moments, each regarding the other keenly.

“Mrs. Hoyt--don't forget,” said the former, with a warning emphasis in
her voice. “Mrs. Bray is dead.”

In her heart Mrs. Dinneford wished that it were indeed so.

“Anything wrong?” asked the black-eyed little woman.

“Do you know a Pinky Swett?” asked Mrs. Dinneford, abruptly.

Mrs. Hoyt--so we must now call her--betrayed surprise at this
question, and was about answering “No,” but checked herself and gave a
half-hesitating “Yes,” adding the question, “What about her?”

Before Mrs. Dinneford could reply, however, Mrs. Hoyt took hold of her
arm and said, “Come up to my room. Walls have ears sometimes, and I will
not answer for these.”

Mrs. Dinneford went with her up stairs to a chamber in the rear part of
the building.

“We shall be out of earshot here,” said Mrs. Hoyt as she closed the
door, locking it at the same time. “And now tell me what's up, and what
about Pinky Swett.”

“You know her?”

“Yes, slightly.”

“More than slightly, I guess.”

Mrs. Hoyt's eyes flashed impatiently. Mrs. Dinneford saw it, and took
warning.

“She's got that cursed baby.”

“How do you know?”

“No matter how I know. It's enough that I know. Who is she?”

“That question may be hard to answer. About all I know of her is that
she came from the country a few years ago, and has been drifting about
here ever since.”

“What is she doing with that baby? and how did she get hold of it?”

“Questions more easily asked than answered.”

“Pshaw! I don't want any beating about the bush, Mrs. Bray.”

“Mrs. Hoyt,” said the person addressed.

“Oh, well, Mrs. Hoyt, then. We ought to understand each other by this
time.”

“I guess we do;” and the little woman arched her brows.

“I don't want any beating about the bush,” resumed Mrs. Dinneford. “I am
here on business.”

“Very well; let's to business, then;” and Mrs. Hoyt leaned back in her
chair.

“Edith knows that this woman has the baby,” said Mrs. Dinneford.

“What!” and Mrs. Hoyt started to her feet.

“The mayor has been seen, and the police are after her.”

“How do you know?”

“Enough that I know. And now, Mrs. Hoyt, this thing must come to an
end, and there is not an instant to be lost. Has Pinky Swett, as she is
called, been told where the baby came from?”

“Not by me.”

“By anybody?”

“That is more than I can say.”

“What has become of the woman I gave it to?”

“She's about somewhere.”

“When did you see her?”

Mrs. Hoyt pretended to think for some moments, and then replied:

“Not for a month or two.”

“Had she the baby then?”

“No; she was rid of it long before that.”

“Did she know this Pinky Swett?”

“Yes.”

“Curse the brat! If I'd thought all this trouble was to come, I'd have
smothered it before it was half an hour old.”

“Risky business,” remarked Mrs. Hoyt.

“Safer than to have let it live,” said Mrs. Dinneford, a hard, evil
expression settling around her mouth. “And now I want the thing done.
You understand. Find this Pinky Swett. The police are after her, and may
be ahead of you. I am desperate, you see. Anything but the discovery and
possession of this child by Edith. It must be got out of the way. If it
will not starve, it must drown.”

Mrs. Dinneford's face was distorted by the strength of her evil
passions. Her eyes were full of fire, flashing now, and now glaring like
those of a wild animal.

“It might fall out of a window,” said Mrs. Hoyt, in a low, even voice,
and with a faint smile on her lips. “Children fall out of windows
sometimes.”

“But don't always get killed,” answered Mrs. Dinneford, coldly.

“Or, it might drop from somebody's arms into the river--off the deck of
a ferryboat, I mean,” added Mrs. Hoyt.

“That's better. But I don't care how it's done, so it's done.”

“Accidents are safer,” said Mrs. Hoyt.

“I guess you're right about that. Let it be an accident, then.”

It was half an hour from the time Mrs. Dinneford entered this house
before she came away. As she passed from the door, closely veiled, a
gentleman whom she knew very well was going by on the opposite side
of the street. From something in his manner she felt sure that he
had recognized her, and that the recognition had caused him no little
surprise. Looking back two or three times as she hurried homeward, she
saw, to her consternation, that he was following her, evidently with the
purpose of making sure of her identity.

To throw this man off of her track was Mrs. Dinneford's next concern.
This she did by taking a street-car that was going in a direction
opposite to the part of the town in which she lived, and riding for
a distance of over a mile. An hour afterward she came back to her own
neighborhood, but not without a feeling of uneasiness. Just as she
was passing up to the door of her residence a gentleman came hurriedly
around the nearest corner. She recognized him at a glance. It seemed as
if the servant would never answer her ring. On he came, until the sound
of his steps was in her ears. He was scarcely ten paces distant when the
door opened and she passed in. When she gained her room, she sat down
faint and trembling. Here was a new element in the danger and disgrace
that were digging her steps so closely.

As we have seen, Edith did not make her appearance at the mission
sewing-school on the following Thursday, nor did she go there for many
weeks afterward. The wild hope that had taken her to Briar street, the
nervous strain and agitation attendant on that visit, and the reaction
occasioned by her father's failure to get possession of the baby, were
too much for her strength, and an utter prostration of mind and body was
the consequence. There was no fever nor sign of any active disease--only
weakness, Nature's enforced quietude, that life and reason might be
saved.




CHAPTER XVII.



_THE_ police were at fault. They found Pinky Swett, but were not able to
find the baby. Careful as they were in their surveillance, she managed
to keep them on the wrong track and to baffle every effort to discover
what had been done with the child.

In this uncertainty months went by. Edith came up slowly from her
prostrate condition, paler, sadder and quieter, living in a kind of
waking dream. Her father tried to hold her back from her mission work
among the poor, but she said, “I must go, father; I will die if I do
not.”

And so her life lost itself in charities. Now and then her mother
made an effort to draw her into society. She had not yet given up her
ambition, nor her hope of one day seeing her daughter take social rank
among the highest, or what she esteemed the highest. But her power over
Edith was entirely gone. She might as well have set herself to turn
the wind from its course as to influence her in anything. It was all in
vain. Edith had dropped out of society, and did not mean to go back. She
had no heart for anything outside of her home, except the Christian work
to which she had laid her hands.

The restless, watchful, suspicious manner exhibited for a long time by
Mrs. Dinneford, and particularly noticed by Edith, gradually wore off.
She grew externally more like her old self, but with something new in
the expression of her face when in repose, that gave a chill to the
heart of Edith whenever she saw its mysterious record, that seemed in
her eyes only an imperfect effort to conceal some guilty secret.

Thus the mother and daughter, though in daily personal contact, stood
far apart--were internally as distant from each other as the antipodes.

As for Mr. Dinneford, what he had seen and heard on his first visit to
Briar street had aroused him to a new and deeper sense of his duty as
a citizen. Against all the reluctance and protests of his natural
feelings, he had compelled himself to stand face to face with the
appalling degradation and crime that festered and rioted in that almost
Heaven-deserted region. He had heard and read much about its evil
condition; but when, under the protection of a policeman, he went from
house to house, from den to den, through cellar and garret and hovel,
comfortless and filthy as dog-kennels and pig-styes, and saw the sick
and suffering, the utterly vile and debauched, starving babes and
children with faces marred by crime, and the legion of harpies who were
among them as birds of prey, he went back to his home sick at heart, and
with a feeling of helplessness and hopelessness out of which he found it
almost impossible to rise.

We cannot stain our pages with a description of what he saw. It is so
vile and terrible, alas, so horrible, that few would credit it. The few
imperfect glimpses of life in that region which we have already given
are sad enough and painful enough, but they only hint at the real truth.

“What can be done?” asked Mr. Dinneford of the missionary, at their next
meeting, in a voice that revealed his utter despair of a remedy. “To me
it seems as if nothing but fire could purify this region.”

“The causes that have produced this would soon create another as bad,”
 was answered.

“What are the causes?”

“The primary cause,” said Mr. Paulding, “is the effort of hell to
establish itself on the earth for the destruction of human souls; the
secondary cause lies in the indifference and supineness of the people.
'While the husband-men slept the enemy sowed tares.' Thus it was of
old, and thus it is to-day. The people are sleeping or indifferent, the
churches are sleeping or indifferent, while the enemy goes on sowing
tares for the harvest of death.”

“Well may you say the harvest of death,” returned Mr. Dinneford,
gloomily.

“And hell,” added the missionary, with a stern emphasis. “Yes, sir, it
is the harvest of death and hell that is gathered here, and such a
full harvest! There is little joy in heaven over the sheaves that are
garnered in this accursed region. What hope is there in fire, or any
other purifying process, if the enemy be permitted to go on sowing his
evil seed at will?”

“How will you prevent it?” asked Mr. Dinneford.

“Not by standing afar off and leaving the enemy in undisputed
possession--not by sleeping while he sows and reaps and binds into
bundles for the fires, his harvests of human souls! We must be as alert
and wise and ready of hand as he; and God being our helper, we can drive
him from the field!”

“You have thought over this sad problem a great deal,” said Mr.
Dinneford. “You have stood face to face with the enemy for years, and
know his strength and his resources. Have you any well-grounded hope of
ever dislodging him from this stronghold?”

“I have just said it, Mr. Dinneford. But until the churches and the
people come up to the help of the Lord against the mighty, he cannot be
dislodged. I am standing here, sustained in my work by a small band of
earnest Christian men and women, like an almost barren rock in the midst
of a down-rushing river on whose turbulent surface thousands are being
swept to destruction. The few we are able to rescue are as a drop in
the bucket to the number who are lost. In weakness and sorrow, almost
in despair sometimes, we stand on our rock, with the cry of lost souls
mingling with the cry of fiends in our ears, and wonder at the churches
and the people, that they stand aloof--nay, worse, turn from us coldly
often--when we press the claims of this worse than heathen people who
are perishing at their very doors.

“Sir,” continued the missionary, warming on his theme, “I was in a
church last Sunday that cost its congregation over two hundred thousand
dollars. It was an anniversary occasion, and the collections for the day
were to be given to some foreign mission. How eloquently the preacher
pleaded for the heathen! What vivid pictures of their moral and
spiritual destitution he drew! How full of pathos he was, even to tears!
And the congregation responded in a contribution of over three thousand
dollars, to be sent somewhere, and to be disbursed by somebody of whom
not one in a hundred of the contributors knew anything or took the
trouble to inform themselves. I felt sick and oppressed at such a
waste of money and Christian sympathy, when heathen more destitute and
degraded than could be found in any foreign land were dying at home in
thousands every year, unthought of and uncared for. I gave no amens to
his prayers--I could not. They would have stuck in my throat. I said to
myself, in bitterness and anger, 'How dare a watchman on the walls
of Zion point to an enemy afar off, of whose movements and power and
organization he knows but little, while the very gates of the city are
being stormed and its walls broken down?' But you must excuse me, Mr.
Dinneford. I lose my calmness sometimes when these things crowd my
thoughts too strongly. I am human like the rest, and weak, and cannot
stand in the midst of this terrible wickedness and suffering year after
year without being stirred by it to the very inmost of my being. In my
intense absorption I can see nothing else sometimes.”

He paused for a little while, and then said, in a quiet, business way,

“In seeking a remedy for the condition of society found here, we must
let common sense and a knowledge of human nature go hand in hand with
Christian charity. To ignore any of these is to make failure certain. If
the whisky-and policy-shops were all closed, the task would be easy. In
a single month the transformation would be marvelous. But we cannot hope
for this, at least not for a long time to come--not until politics and
whisky are divorced, and not until associations of bad men cease to
be strong enough in our courts to set law and justice at defiance. Our
work, then, must be in the face of these baleful influences.”

“Is the evil of lottery-policies so great that you class it with the
curse of rum?” asked Mr. Dinneford.

“It is more concealed, but as all-pervading and almost as disastrous in
its effects. The policy-shops draw from the people, especially the poor
and ignorant, hundreds of thousands of dollars every year. There is no
more chance of thrift for one who indulges in this sort of gambling than
there is for one who indulges in drink. The vice in either case drags
its subject down to want, and in most cases to crime. I could point you
to women virtuous a year ago, but who now live abandoned lives; and they
would tell you, if you would question them, that their way downward
was through the policy-shops. To get the means of securing a hoped-for
prize--of getting a hundred or two hundred dollars for every single
one risked, and so rising above want or meeting some desperate
exigency--virtue was sacrificed in an evil moment.”

“The whisky-shops brutalize, benumb and debase or madden with cruel and
murderous passions; the policy-shops, more seductive and fascinating in
their allurements, lead on to as deep a gulf of moral ruin and hopeless
depravity. I have seen the poor garments of a dying child sold at a
pawn-shop for a mere trifle by its infatuated mother, and the money
thrown away in this kind of gambling. Women sell or pawn their clothing,
often sending their little children to dispose of these articles, while
they remain half clad at home to await the daily drawings and receive
the prize they fondly hope to obtain, but which rarely, if ever, comes.

“Children learn early to indulge this vice, and lie and steal in order
to obtain money to gratify it. You would be amazed to see the scores of
little boys and girls, white and black, who daily visit the policy-shops
in this neighborhood to put down the pennies they have begged or
received for stolen articles on some favorite numbers--quick-witted,
sharp, eager little wretches, who talk the lottery slang as glibly as
older customers. What hope is there in the future for these children?
Will their education in the shop of a policy-dealer fit them to become
honest, industrious citizens?”

All this was so new and dreadful to Mr. Dinneford that he was stunned
and disheartened; and when, after an interview with the missionary
that lasted over an hour, he went away, it was with a feeling of utter
discouragement. He saw little hope of making head against the flood of
evil that was devastating this accursed region.




CHAPTER XVIII.



_MRS. HOYT_, _alias_ Bray, found Pinky Swett, but she did not find the
poor cast-off baby. Pinky had resolved to make it her own capital in
trade. She parleyed and trifled with Mrs. Hoyt week after week, and each
did her best to get down to the other's secret, but in vain. Mutually
baffled, they parted at last in bitter anger.

One day, about two months after the interview between Mrs. Dinneford
and Mrs. Hoyt described in another chapter, the former received in an
envelope a paragraph cut from a newspaper. It read as follows:

“A CHILD DROWNED.--A sad accident occurred yesterday on board the
steamer Fawn as she was going down the river. A woman was standing with
a child in her arms near the railing on the lower deck forward. Suddenly
the child gave a spring, and was out of her arms in a moment. She caught
after it frantically, but in vain. Every effort was made to recover the
child, but all proved fruitless. It did not rise to the surface of the
water.”

Mrs. Dinneford read the paragraph twice, and then tore it into little
bits. Her mouth set itself sternly. A long sigh of relief came up from
her chest. After awhile the hard lines began slowly to disappear, giving
place to a look of satisfaction and comfort.

“Out of my way at last,” she staid, rising and beginning to move about
the room. But the expression of relief and confidence which had come
into her face soon died out. The evil counselors that lead the soul into
sin become its tormentors after the sin is committed, and torture it
with fears. So tortured they this guilty and wretched woman at every
opportunity. They led her on step by step to do evil, and then crowded
her mind with suggestions of perils and consequences the bare thought of
which filled her with terror.

It was only a few weeks after this that Mrs. Dinneford, while looking
over a morning paper, saw in the court record the name of Pinky
Swett. This girl had been tried for robbing a man of his pocket-book,
containing five hundred dollars, found guilty, and sentenced to prison
for a term of two years.

“Good again!” exclaimed Mrs. Dinneford, with satisfaction. “The wheel
turns.”

After that she gradually rose above the doubts and dread of exposure
that haunted her continually, and set herself to work to draw her
daughter back again into society. But she found her influence over Edith
entirely gone. Indeed, Edith stood so far away from her that she seemed
more like a stranger than a child.

Two or three times had Pinky Swett gone to the mission sewing-school in
order to get a sight of Edith. Her purpose was to follow her home, and
so find out her name and were she lived. With this knowledge in her
possession, she meant to visit Mrs. Bray, and by a sudden or casual
mention by name of Edith as the child's mother throw her off her guard,
and lead her to betray the fact if it were really so. But Edith was sick
at home, and did not go to the school. After a few weeks the little girl
who was to identify Edith as the person who had shown so much interest
in the baby was taken away from Grubb's court by her mother, and nobody
could tell where to find her. So, Pinky had to abandon her efforts in
this direction, and Edith, when she was strong enough to go back to
the sewing-school, missed the child, from whom she was hoping to hear
something that might give a clue to where the poor waif had been taken.

Up to the time of her arrest and imprisonment, Pinky had faithfully paid
the child's board, and looked in now and then upon the woman who had it
in charge, to see that it was properly cared for. How marvelously the
baby had improved in these two or three months! The shrunken limb's were
rounded into beautiful symmetry, and the pinched face looked full and
rosy. The large brown eyes, in which you once saw only fear or a mystery
of suffering, were full of a happy light, and the voice rang out often
in merry child-laughter. The baby had learned to walk, and was daily
growing more and more lovable.

But after Pinky's imprisonment there was a change. The woman--Mrs. Burke
by name--in whose care the child had been placed could not afford to
keep him for nothing. The two dollars week received for his board added
just enough to her income to enable her to remain at home. But failing
to receive this, she must go out for day's work in families at least
twice in every week.

What, then, was to be done with little Andy, as the baby was called?
At first Mrs. Burke thought of getting him into one of the homes
for friendless children, but the pleasant child had crept into her
affections, and she could not bear the thought of giving him up. His
presence stirred in her heart old and tender things long buried out of
sight, and set the past, with its better and purer memories, side
by side with the present. She had been many times a mother, but her
children were all dead but one, and she--Alas! the thought of her,
whenever it came, made her heart heavy and sad.

“I will keep him a while and see, how it comes out,” she said, on
getting the promise of a neighbor to let Andy play with her children and
keep an eye on him whenever she was out. He had grown strong, and could
toddle about and take care of himself wonderfully well for a child of
his age.

And now began a new life for the baby--a life in which he must look
out for himself and hold his own in a hand-to-hand struggle. He had no
rights that the herd of children among whom he was thrown felt bound to
respect; and if he were not able to maintain his rights, he must go down
helplessly, and he did go down daily, often hourly. But he had will and
vital force, and these brought him always to his feet again, and with
strength increased rather than lost. On the days that Mrs. Burke went
out he lived for most of the time in the little street, playing with the
children that swarmed its pavements, often dragged from before wheels or
horses' hoofs by a friendly hand, or lifted from some gutter in which he
had fallen, dripping with mud.

When Mrs. Burke came home on the evening of her first day out, the baby
was a sight to see. His clothes were stiff with dirt, his shoes and
stockings wet, and his face more like that of a chimney-sweep than
anything else. But this was not all; there was a great lump as large
as a pigeon's egg on the back of his head, a black-and-blue spot on his
forehead and a bad cut on his upper lip. His joy at seeing her and the
tearful cry he gave as he threw his arm's about her neck quite overcame
Mrs. Burke, and caused her eyes to grow dim. She was angry at the plight
in which she found him, and said some hard things to the woman who had
promised to look after the child, at which the latter grew angry in
turn, and told her to stay at home and take care of the brat herself, or
put him in one of the homes.

The fresh care and anxiety felt by Mrs. Burke drew little Andy nearer
and made her reject more decidedly the thought of giving him up. She
remained at home on the day following, but did not find it so easy as
before to keep the baby quiet. He had got a taste of the free, wild life
of the street, of its companionship and excitement, and fretted to go
out. Toward evening she put by her work and went on the pavement with
Andy. It was swarming with children. At the sight of them he began to
scream with pleasure. Pulling his hand free from that of Mrs. Burke,
he ran in among them, and in a moment after was tumbled over on the
pavement. His head got a hard knock, but he didn't seem to mind it, for
he scrambled to his feet and commenced tossing his hands about, laughing
and crying out as wildly as the rest. In a little while, over he was
knocked again, and as he fell one of the children stepped on his hand
and hurt him so that he screamed with pain. Mrs. Burke caught him in her
arms; but when he found that she was going to take him in the house he
stopped crying and struggled to get down. He was willing to take the
knocks and falls. The pleasure of this free life among children was more
to him than any of the suffering it brought.

On the next day Mrs. Burke had to go out again. Another neighbor
promised to look after Andy. When she returned at night, she found
things worse, if anything, than before. The child was dirtier, if that
were possible, and there were two great lumps on his head, instead of
one. He had been knocked down by a horse in the street, escaping death
by one of the narrowest of chances, and had been discovered and removed
from a ladder up which he had climbed a distance of twenty feet.

What help was there? None that Mrs. Burke knew, except to give up the
child, and she was not unselfish enough for this. The thought of sending
him away was always attended with pain. It would take the light out of
her poor lonely life, into which he had brought a few stray sunbeams.

She could not, she would not, give him up. He must take his chances. Ah,
but they were hard chances! Children mature fast under the stimulus
of street-training. Andy had a large brain and an active, nervous
organization. Life in the open air gave vigor and hardness to his
body. As the months went by he learned self-reliance, caution,
self-protection, and took a good many lessons in the art of aggression.
A rapidly-growing child needs a large amount of nutritious food to
supply waste and furnish material for the daily-increasing bodily
structure. Andy did not get this. At two years of age he had lost all
the roundness of babyhood. His limbs were slender, his body thin and his
face colorless and hungry-looking.

About this time--that is, when Andy was two years old--Mrs. Burke took
sick and died. She had been failing for several months, and unable to
earn sufficient even to pay her rent. But for the help of neighbors and
an occasional supply of food or fuel from some public charity, she would
have starved. At her death Andy had no home and no one to care for him.
One pitying neighbor after another would take him in at night, or let
him share a meal with her children, but beyond this he was utterly cast
out and friendless. It was summer-time when Mrs. Burke died, and the
poor waif was spared for a time the suffering of cold.

Now and then a mother's heart would be touched, and after a
half-reluctantly given supper and a place where he might sleep for the
night would mend and wash his soiled clothes and dry them by the fire,
ready for morning. The pleased look that she saw in his large, sad
eyes--for they had grown wistful and sad since the only one he had known
as a mother died--was always her reward, and something not to be put
out of her memory. Many of the children took kindly to Andy, and often
supplied him with food.

“Andy is so hungry, mamma; can't I take him something to eat?” rarely
failed to bring the needed bread for the poor little cast-adrift. And
if he was discovered now and then sound asleep in bed with some pitying
child who had taken him in stealthily after dark, few were hard-hearted
enough to push him into the street, or make him go down and sleep on the
kitchen floor. Yet this was not unfrequently done. Poverty is sometimes
very cruel, yet often tender and compassionate.

One day, a few months after Mrs. Burke's death, Andy, who was beginning
to drift farther and farther away from the little street, yet always
managing to get back into it as darkness came on, that he might lay his
tired body in some friendly place, got lost in strange localities.
He had wandered about for many hours, sitting now on some step or
cellar-door or horse-block, watching the children at play and sometimes
joining in their sports, when they would let him, with the spontaneous
abandon of a puppy or a kitten, and now enjoying some street-show or
attractive shop-window. There was nothing of the air of a lost child
about him. For all that his manner betrayed, his home might have been in
the nearest court or alley. So, he wandered along from street to
street without attracting the special notice of any--a bare-headed,
bare-footed, dirty, half-clad atom of humanity not three years old.

Hungry, tired and cold, for the summer was gone and mid-autumn had
brought its chilly nights, Andy found himself, as darkness fell, in a
vile, narrow court, among some children as forlorn and dirty as himself.
It was Grubb's court--his old home--though in his memory there was of
course no record of the place.

Too tired and hungry for play, Andy was sitting on the step of a
wretched hovel, when the door opened and a woman called sharply the
names of her two children. They answered a little way off. “Come in
this minute, and get your suppers,” she called again, and turning back
without noticing Andy, left the door open for her children. The poor
cast-adrift looked in and saw light and food and comfort--a home that
made him heartsick with longing, mean and disordered and miserable as
it would have appeared to your eyes and mine, reader. The two children,
coming at their mother's call, found him standing just on the threshold
gazing in wistfully; and as they entered, he, drawn by their attraction,
went in also. Then, turning toward her children, the mother saw Andy.

“Out of this!” she cried, in quick anger, raising her hand and moving
hastily toward the child. “Off home with you!”

Andy might well be frightened at the terrible face and threatening words
of this woman, and he was frightened. But he did not turn and fly, as
she meant that he should. He had learned, young as he was, that if he
were driven off by every rebuff, he would starve. It was only through
importunity and perseverance that he lived. So he held his ground, his
large, clear eyes fixed steadily on the woman's face as she advanced
upon him. Something in those eyes and in the firmly-set mouth checked
the woman's purpose if she had meant violence, but she thrust him out
into the damp street, nevertheless, though not roughly, and shut the
door against him.

Andy did not cry; poor little baby that he was, he had long since
learned that for him crying did no good. It brought him nothing. Just
across the street a door stood open. As a stray kitten creeps in through
an open door, so crept he through this one, hoping for shelter and a
place of rest.

“Who're you?” growled the rough but not unkindly voice of a man, coming
from the darkness. At the same moment a light gleamed out from a match,
and then the steadier flame of a candle lit up the small room, not more
than eight or nine feet square, and containing little that could be
called furniture. The floor was bare. In one corner were some old bits
of carpet and a blanket. A small table, a couple of chairs with the
backs broken off and a few pans and dishes made up the inventory of
household goods.

As the light made all things clear in this poor room, Andy saw the
bloodshot eyes, and grizzly face of a man, not far past middle life.

“Who are you, little one?” he growled again as the light gave him a view
of Andy's face. This growl had in it a tone of kindness and welcome to
the ears of Andy who came forward, saying,

“I'm Andy.”

“Indeed! You're Andy, are you?” and he reached out one of his hands.

“Yes; I'm Andy,” returned the child, fixing his eyes with a look so
deep and searching on the man's face that they held him as by a kind of
fascination.

“Well, Andy, where did you come from?” asked the man.

“Don't know,” was answered.

“Don't know!”

Andy shook his head.

“Where do you live?”

“Don't live nowhere,” returned the child; “and I'm hungry.”

“Hungry?” The man let the hand he was still holding drop, and getting up
quickly, took some bread from a closet and set it on the old table.

Andy did not wait for an invitation, but seized upon the bread and
commenced eating almost ravenously. As he did so the man fumbled in his
pockets. There were a few pennies there. He felt them over, counting
them with his fingers, and evidently in some debate with himself.
At last, as he closed the debate, he said, with a kind of compelled
utterance,

“I say, young one, wouldn't you like some milk with your bread?”

“Milk! oh my I oh goody! yes,” answered the child, a gleam of pleasure
coming into his face.

“Then you shall have some;” and catching up a broken mug, the man went
out. In a minute or two he returned with a pint of milk, into which he
broke a piece of bread, and then sat watching Andy as he filled himself
with the most delicious food he had tasted for weeks, his marred face
beaming with a higher satisfaction than he had known for a long time.

“Is it good?” asked the man.

“I bet you!” was the cheery answer.

“Well, you're a little brick,” laughed the man as he stroked Andy's
head. “And you don't live anywhere?”

“No.”

“Is your mother dead?”

“Yes.”

“And your father?”

“Hain't got no father.”

“Would you like to live here?”

Andy looked toward the empty bowl from which he had made such a
satisfying meal, and said,

“Yes.”

“It will hold us both. You're not very big;” and as he said this the man
drew his arm about the boy in a fond sort of way.

“I guess you're tired,” he added, for Andy, now that an arm was drawn
around him, leaned against it heavily.

“Yes, I'm tired,” said the child.

“And sleepy too, poor little fellow! It isn't much of a bed I can give
you, but it's better than a door-step or a rubbish corner.”

Then he doubled the only blanket he had, and made as soft a bed as
possible. On this he laid Andy, who was fast asleep almost as soon as
down.

“Poor little chap!” said the man, in a tender, half-broken voice, as he
stood over the sleeping child, candle in hand. “Poor little chap!”

The sight troubled him. He turned with a quick, disturbed movement and
put the candle down. The light streaming upward into his face showed
the countenance of a man so degraded by intemperance that everything
attractive had died out of it. His clothes were scanty, worn almost
to tatters, and soiled with the slime and dirt of many an ash-heap or
gutter where he had slept off his almost daily fits of drunkenness.
There was an air of irresolution about him, and a strong play of feeling
in his marred, repulsive face, as he stood by the table on which he
had set the candle. One hand was in his pocket, fumbling over the few
pennies yet remaining there.

As if drawn by an attraction he could not resist, his eyes kept turning
to the spot where Andy lay sleeping. Once, as they came back, they
rested on the mug from which the child had taken his supper of bread and
milk.

“Poor little fellow!” came from his lips, in a tone of pity.

Then he sat down by the table and leaned his head on his hand. His face
was toward the corner of the room where the child lay. He still fumbled
the small coins in his pocket, but after a while his fingers ceased to
play with them, then his hand was slowly withdrawn from the pocket, a
deep sigh accompanying the act.

After the lapse of several minutes he took up the candle, and going over
to the bed, crouched down and let the light fall on Andy's face. The
large forehead, soiled as it was, looked white to the man's eyes, and
the brown matted hair, as he drew it through his fingers, was soft and
beautiful. Memory had taken him back for years, and he was looking at
the fair forehead and touching the soft brown hair of another baby. His
eyes grew dim. He set the candle upon the floor, and putting his hands
over his face, sobbed two or three times.

When this paroxysm of feeling went off, he got up with a steadier air,
and set the light back upon the table. The conflict going on in his
mind was not quite over, but another look at Andy settled the question.
Stooping with a hurried movement, he blew out the candle, then groped
his way over to the bed, and lying down, took the child in his arms and
drew him close to his breast. So the morning found them both asleep.




CHAPTER XIX.



_MR. DINNEFORD_ had become deeply interested in the work that was going
on in Briar street, and made frequent visits to the mission house.
Sometimes he took heart in the work, but oftener he suffered great
discouragement of feeling. In one of his many conversations with Mr.
Paulding he said,

“Looking as I do from the standpoint gained since I came here, I am
inclined to say there is no hope. The enemy is too strong for us.”

“He is very strong,” returned the missionary, “but God is stronger, and
our cause is his cause. We have planted his standard here in the very
midst of the enemy's territory, and have not only held our ground for
years, but gained some victories. If we had the people, the churches and
the law-officers on our side, we could drive him out in a year. But we
have no hope of this--at least not for a long time to come; and so, as
wisely as we can, as earnestly as we can, and with the limited means at
our control, we are fighting the foe and helping the weak, and gaining a
little every year.”

“And you really think there is gain?”

“I know it,” answered the missionary, with a ringing confidence in his
voice. “It is by comparisons that we are able to get at true results.
Come with me into our school-room, next door.”

They passed from the office of the mission into the street.

“These buildings,” said Mr. Paulding, “erected by that true Christian
charity which hopeth all things, stand upon the very site of one of the
worst dens once to be found in this region. In them we have a chapel for
worship, two large and well ventilated school-rooms, where from two to
three hundred children that would not be admitted into any public school
are taught daily, a hospital and dispensary and bathrooms. Let me show
you the school. Then I will give you a measure of comparison.”

Mr. Dinneford went up to the school-rooms. He found them crowded with
children, under the care of female teachers, who seemed to have but
little trouble in keeping them in order. Such a congregation of boys and
girls Mr. Dinneford had never seen before. It made his heart ache as he
looked into some of their marred and pinched, faces, most of which bore
signs of pain, suffering, want and evil. It moved him to tears when he
heard them sing, led by one of the teachers, a tender hymn expressive of
the Lord's love for poor neglected children.

“The Lord Jesus came to seek and to save that which was lost,” said the
missionary as they came down from the school-room, “and we are trying to
do the same work. And that our labor is not all in vain will be evident
when I show you what this work was in the beginning. You have seen a
little of what it is now.”

They went back to the office of the missionary.

“It is nearly twenty years,” said Mr. Paulding, “since the organization
of our mission. The question of what to do for the children became
at once the absorbing one. The only building in which to open a
Sunday-school that could be obtained was an old dilapidated frame house
used as a receptacle for bones, rags, etc.; but so forbidding was its
aspect, and so noisome the stench arising from the putrefying bones
and rotting rags, that it was feared for the health of those who
might occupy it. However it was agreed to try the effect of scraping,
scrubbing, white-washing and a liberal use of chloride of lime. This
was attended with such good effects that, notwithstanding the place was
still offensive to the olfactories, the managers concluded to open in it
our first Sabbath-school.

“No difficulty was experienced in gathering in a sufficient number of
children to compose a school; for, excited by such a novel spectacle
as a Sabbath-school in that region, they came in crowds. But such a
Sabbath-school as that first one was beyond all doubt the rarest thing
of the kind that any of those interested in its formation had ever
witnessed. The jostling, tumbling, scratching, pinching, pulling of
hair, little ones crying and larger ones punching each other's heads and
swearing most profanely, altogether formed a scene of confusion and
riot that disheartened the teachers in the start, and made them begin to
think they had undertaken a hopeless task.

“As to the appearance of these young Ishmaelites, it was plain that they
had rarely made the acquaintance of soap and water. Hands, feet and
face exhibited a uniform crust of mud and filth. As it was necessary to
obtain order, the superintendent, remembering that 'music hath charms
to soothe the savage breast,' decided to try its effects on the untamed
group before him; and giving out a line of a hymn adapted to the tune of
'Lily Dale,' he commenced to sing. The effect was instantaneous. It was
like oil on troubled waters. The delighted youngsters listened to the
first line, and then joined in with such hearty good-will that the old
shanty rang again.

“The attempt to engage and lead them in prayer was, however, a matter of
great difficulty. They seemed to regard the attitude of kneeling as very
amusing, and were reluctant to commit themselves so far to the ridicule
of their companions as to be caught in such a posture. After reading to
them a portion of the Holy Scriptures and telling them of Jesus,
they were dismissed, greatly pleased with their first visit to a
Sabbath-school.

“As for ourselves, we had also received a lesson. We found--what indeed
we had expected--that the poor children were very ignorant, but we also
found what we did not expect--namely, such an acute intelligence and
aptitude to receive instruction as admonished us of the danger of
leaving them to grow up under evil influences to become master-spirits
in crime and pests to society. Many of the faces that we had just seen
were very expressive--indeed, painfully so. Some of them seemed to
exhibit an unnatural and premature development of those passions whose
absence makes childhood so attractive.

“Hunger! ay, its traces were also plainly written there. It is painful
to see the marks of hunger on the human face, but to see the cheeks of
childhood blanched by famine, to behold the attenuated limbs and bright
wolfish eyes, ah! that is a sight.

“The organization of a day-school came next. There were hundreds of
children in the district close about the mission who were wholly without
instruction. They were too dirty, vicious and disorderly to be admitted
into any of the public schools; and unless some special means of
education were provided, they must grow up in ignorance. It was
therefore resolved to open a day-school, but to find a teacher with her
heart in such a work was a difficulty hard to be met; moreover, it was
thought by many unsafe for a lady to remain in this locality alone, even
though a suitable one should offer. But one brave and self-devoted
was found, and one Sunday it was announced to the children in the
Sabbath-school that a day school would be opened in the same building at
nine o'clock on Monday morning.

“About thirty neglected little ones from the lanes and alleys around
the mission were found at the schoolroom door at the appointed hour. But
when admitted, very few of them had any idea of the purpose for which
they were collected. The efforts of the teacher to seat them proved a
failure. The idea among them seemed to be that each should take some
part in amusing the company. One would jump from the back of a bench
upon which he had been seated, while others were creeping about the
floor; another, who deemed himself a proficient in turning somersaults,
would be trying his skill in this way, while his neighbor, equally
ambitious, would show the teacher how he could stand on his head.
Occasionally they would pause and listen to the singing of a hymn or the
reading of a little story; then all would be confusion again; and thus
the morning wore away. The first session having closed, the teacher
retired to her home, feeling that a repetition of the scenes through
which she had passed could scarcely be endured.

“Two o'clock found her again at the door, and the children soon gathered
around her. Upon entering the schoolroom, most of them were induced
to be seated, and a hymn was sung which they had learned in the
Sabbath-school. When it was finished, the question was asked, 'Shall we
pray?' With one accord they answered, 'Yes.' 'And will you be quiet?'
They replied in the affirmative. All were then requested to be silent
and cover their faces. In this posture they remained until the prayer
was closed; and after resuming their seats, for some minutes order was
preserved. This was the only encouraging circumstance of the day.

“For many weeks a stranger would scarcely have recognized a school in
this disorderly gathering which day after day met in the old gloomy
building. Very many difficulties which we may not name were met and
conquered. Fights were of common occurrence. A description of one may
give the reader an idea of what came frequently under our notice.

“A rough boy about fourteen years of age, over whom some influence had
been gained, was chosen monitor one morning; and as he was a leader in
all the mischief, it was hoped that putting him upon his honor would
assist in keeping order. Talking aloud was forbidden. For a few minutes
matters went on charmingly, until some one, tired of the restraint,
broke silence. The monitor, feeling the importance of his position, and
knowing of but one mode of redress, instantly struck him a violent blow
upon the ear, causing him to scream with pain. In a moment the school
was a scene of confusion, the friends of each boy taking sides, and
before the cause of trouble could be ascertained most of the boys
were piled upon each other in the middle of the room, creating sounds
altogether indescribable. The teacher, realizing that she was alone, and
not well understanding her influence, feared for a moment to interfere;
but as matters were growing worse, something must be done. She made
an effort to gain the ear of the monitor, and asked why he did so. He,
confident of being in the right, answered,

“'Teacher, he didn't mind you; he spoke, and I licked him; and I'll do
it again if he don't mind you.'

“His services were of course no longer required, although he had done
his duty according to his understanding of the case.

“Thus it was at the beginning of this work nearly twenty years ago,”
 said the missionary. “Now we have an orderly school of over two hundred
children, who, but for the opportunity here given, would grow up without
even the rudiments of all education. Is not this a gain upon the enemy?
Think of a school like this doing its work daily among these neglected
little ones for nearly a score of years, and you will no longer feel as
if nothing had been done--as if no headway had been gained. Think,
too, of the Sabbath-school work in that time, and of the thousands of
children who have had their memories filled with precious texts from the
Bible, who have been told of the loving Saviour who came into the world
and suffered and died for them, and of his tender love and perpetual
care over his children, no matter how poor and vile and afar off
from him they may be. It is impossible that the good seed of the word
scattered here for so long a time should not have taken root in many
hearts. We know that they have, and can point to scores of blessed
instances--can take you to men and women, now good and virtuous
people, who, but for our day-and Sabbath-schools, would, in all human
probability, be now among the outcast, the vicious and the criminal.

“So much for what has been done among the children. Our work with men
and women has not been so fruitful as might well be supposed, and yet
great good has been accomplished even among the hardened, the desperate
and the miserably vile and besotted. Bad as things are to-day--awful
to see and to contemplate, shocking and disgraceful to a Christian
community--they were nearly as bad again at the time this mission set
up the standard of God and made battle in his name. Our work began as a
simple religious movement, with street preaching.”

“And with what effect?” asked Mr. Dinneford.

“With good effect, in a limited number of cases, I trust. In a degraded
community like this there will always be some who had a different
childhood from that of the crowds of young heathen who swarm its courts
and alleys; some who in early life had religious training, and in whose
memories were stored up holy things from Scripture; some who have
tender and sweet recollection of a mother and home and family prayer and
service in God's temples. In the hearts of such God's Spirit in moving
could touch and quicken and flush with reviving life these old memories,
and through them bring conviction of sin, and an intense desire to rise
out of the horrible pit into which they had fallen and the clay wherein
their feet were mired. Angels could come near to these by what of good
and true was to be found half hidden, but not erased from their book of
life, and so help in the work of their recovery and salvation.

“But, sir, beyond this class there is small hope, I fear, in preaching
and praying. The great mass of these wretched beings have had little or
no early religious instruction. There, are but few, if any, remains
of things pure and good and holy stored away since childhood in their
memories to be touched and quickened by the Spirit of God. And so we
must approach them in another and more external way. We must begin with
their physical evils, and lessen these as fast as possible; we must
remove temptation from their doors, or get them as far as possible
out of the reach of temptation, but in this work not neglecting the
religious element as an agency, of untold power.

“Christ fed the hungry, and healed the sick, and clothed the naked,
and had no respect unto the persons of men. And we, if we would lift up
fallen humanity, must learn by his example. It is not by preaching and
prayer and revival meetings that the true Christian philanthropist can
hope to accomplish any great good among the people here, but by doing
all in his power to change their sad external condition and raise them
out of their suffering and degradation. Without some degree of external
order and obedience to the laws of natural life, it is, I hold, next to
impossible, to plant in the mind any seeds of spiritual truth. There
is no ground there. The parable of the sower that went forth to sow
illustrates this law. Only the seed that fell on good ground brought
forth fruit. Our true work, then, among this heathen people, of whom the
churches take so little care, is first to get the ground in order for
the planting, of heavenly seed. Failing in this, our hope is small.”

“This mission has changed its attitude since the beginning,” said Mr.
Dinneford.

“Yes. Good and earnest men wrought for years with the evil elements
around them, trusting in God's Spirit to change the hearts of the vile
and abandoned sinners among whom they preached and prayed. But there was
little preparation of the ground, and few seeds got lodgment except
in stony places, by the wayside and among thorns. Our work now is to
prepare the ground, and in this work, slowly as it is progressing,
we have great encouragement. Every year we can mark the signs of
advancement. Every year we make some head against the enemy. Every year
our hearts take courage and are refreshed by the smell of grasses and
the odor of flowers and the sight of fruit-bearing plants in once barren
and desolate places. The ground is surely being made ready for the
sower.”

“I am glad to hear you speak so encouragingly,” returned Mr. Dinneford.
“To me the case looked desperate--wellnigh hopeless. Anything worse than
I have witnessed here seemed impossible.”

“It is only by comparisons, as I said before, that we can get at the
true measure of change and progress,” answered the missionary. “Since
we have been at work in earnest to improve the external life of this
region, we have had much to encourage us. True, what we have done has
made only a small impression on the evil that exists here; but the value
of this impression lies in the fact that it shows what can be done
with larger agencies. Double our effective force, and we can double the
result. Increase it tenfold, and ten times as much can be done.”

“What is your idea of this work?” said Mr. Dinneford. “In other words,
what do you think the best practical way to purify this region?”

“If you draw burning brands and embers close together, your fire grows
stronger; if you scatter them apart, it will go out,” answered the
missionary. “Moral and physical laws correspond to each other. Crowd
bad men and women together, and they corrupt and deprave each other.
Separate them, and you limit their evil power and make more possible for
good the influence of better conditions. Let me give you an instance: A
man and his wife who had lived in a wretched way in one of the poorest
hovels in Briar street for two years, and who had become idle and
intemperate, disappeared from among us about six months ago. None of
their neighbors knew or cared much what had become of them. They had
two children. Last week, as I was passing the corner of a street in the
south-western part of the city in which stood a row of small new houses,
a neatly-dressed woman came out of a store with a basket in her hand. I
did not know her, but by the brightening look in her face I saw that she
knew me.

“'Mr. Paulding,' she said, in a pleased way, holding out her hand; 'you
don't know me,' she added, seeing the doubt in my face. 'I am Mrs.--.'

“'Impossible!' I could not help exclaiming.

“'But it's true, Mr. Paulding,' she averred, a glow of pleasure on her
countenance. 'We've turned over a new leaf.'

“'So I should think from your appearance,' I replied. 'Where do you
live?'

“'In the third house from the corner,' pointing to the neat row of small
brick houses I have mentioned. 'Come and look at our new home. I want to
tell you about it!'

“I was too much pleased to need a second invitation.

“'I've got as clean steps as my neighbors,' she said, with pride in her
voice, 'and shades to my windows, and a bright door-knob. It wasn't so
in Briar street. One had no heart there. Isn't this nice?'

“And she glanced around the little parlor we had entered.

“It was nice, compared to the dirty and disorderly place they had called
their home in Briar street. The floor was covered with a new ingrain
carpet. There were a small table and six cane-seat chairs in the room,
shades at the windows, two or three small pictures on the walls and some
trifling ornaments on the mantel. Everything was clean and the air of
the room sweet.

“'This is my little Emma,' she said as a cleanly-dressed child came into
the room; 'You remember she was in the school.'

“I did remember her as a ragged, dirty-faced child, forlorn and
neglected, like most of the children about here. It was a wonderful
transformation.

“'And now,' I said, 'tell me how all this has come about.'

“'Well, you see, Mr. Paulding,' she answered, 'there was no use in John
and me trying to be anything down there. It was temptation on every
hand, and we were weak and easily tempted. There was nothing to make us
look up or to feel any pride. We lived like our neighbors, and you know
what kind of a way that was.

“'One day John said to me, “Emma,” says he, “it's awful, the way we're
living; we'd better be dead.” His voice was shaky-like, and it kind of
made me feel bad. “I know it, John,” said I, “but what can we do?” “Go
'way from here,” he said. “But where?” I asked. “Anywhere. I'm not all
played out yet;” and he held up his hand and shut it tight. “There's
good stuff in me yet, and if you're willing to make a new start, I am.”
 I put my hand in his, and said, “God helping me, I will try, John.” He
went off that very day and got a room in a decent neighborhood, and we
moved in it before night. We had only one cart-load, and a wretched load
of stuff it was. But I can't tell you how much better it looked when we
got it into our new room, the walls of which were nicely papered, and
the paint clean and white. I fixed up everything and made it as neat as
possible. John was so pleased. “It feels something like old times,” he
said. He had been knocking about a good while, picking up odd jobs and
not half working, but he took heart now, quit drinking and went to work
in good earnest, and was soon making ten dollars a week, every cent of
which he brought home. He now gets sixteen dollars. We haven't made a
back step since. But it wouldn't have been any use trying if we'd stayed
in Briar street. Pride helped us a good deal in the beginning, sir. I
was ashamed not to have my children looking as clean as my neighbors,
and ashamed not to keep things neat and tidy-like. I didn't care
anything about it in Briar street.'

“I give you this instance, true in nearly every particular,” said the
missionary, “in order to show you how incurable is the evil condition of
the people here; unless we can get the burning brands apart, they help
to consume each other.”

“But how to get them apart? that is the difficult question,” said Mr.
Dinneford.

“There are two ways,” was replied--“by forcing the human brands apart,
and by interposing incombustible things between them. As we have no
authority to apply force, and no means at hand for its exercise if we
had the authority, our work has been in the other direction. We have
been trying to get in among these burning brands elements that would
stand the fire, and, so lessen the ardor of combustion.”

“How are you doing this?”

“By getting better houses for the people to live in. Improve the house,
make it more sightly and convenient, and in most cases you will improve
the person who lives in it. He will not kindle so easily, though he yet
remain close to the burning brands.”

“And are you doing this?”

“A little has been done. Two or three years ago a building association
was organized by a few gentlemen of means, with a view to the purchase
of property in this district and the erection of small but good houses,
to be rented at moderate cost to honest and industrious people. A number
of such houses have already been built, and they are now occupied
by tenants of a better class, whose influence on their neighbors is
becoming more and more apparent every day. Brady street--once the worst
place in all this district--has changed wonderfully. There is scarcely
a house in the two blocks through which it runs that does not show some
improvement since the association pulled down half a dozen of its worst
frame tenements and put neat brick dwellings in their places. It is no
uncommon thing now to see pavement sweeping and washing in front of
some of the smallest and poorest of the houses in Brady street where two
years ago the dirt would stick to your feet in passing. A clean muslin
half curtain, a paper shade or a pot of growing plants will meet your
eyes at a window here and there as you pass along. The thieves who once
harbored in this street, and hid their plunder in cellars and garrets
until it could be sold or pawned, have abandoned the locality. They
could not live side by side with honest industry.”

“And all this change may be traced to the work of our building
association, limited as are its means and half-hearted as are its
operations. The worst of our population--the common herd of thieves,
beggars and vile women who expose themselves shamelessly on the
street--are beginning to feel less at home and more in danger of arrest
and exposure. The burning brands are no longer in such close contact,
and so the fires of evil are raging less fiercely. Let in the light, and
the darkness flees. Establish the good, and evil shrinks away, weak and
abashed.”




CHAPTER XX.



_SO_ the morning found them fast asleep. The man awoke first and felt
the child against his bosom, soft and warm. It was some moments ere he
understood what it meant. It seemed as if the wretched life he had been
leading was all a horrible dream out of which he had awakened, and that
the child sleeping in his bosom was his own tenderly-loved baby. But
the sweet illusions faded away, and the hard, sorrowful truth stood out
sternly before him.

Then Andy's eyes opened and looked into his face. There was nothing
scared in the look-hardly an expression of surprise. But the man saw a
mute appeal and a tender confidence that made his heart swell and yearn
toward the homeless little one.

“Had a nice sleep?” he asked, in a tone of friendly encouragement.

Andy nodded his head, and then gazed curiously about the room.

“Want some breakfast?”

The hungry face lit up with a flash of pleasure.

“Of course you do, little one.”

The man was on his feet by this time, with his hand in his pocket,
from which he drew a number of pennies. These he counted over carefully
twice. The number was just ten. If there had been only himself to
provide for, it would not have taken long to settle the question of
expenditure. Five cents at an eating-shop where the caterer supplied
himself from the hodge-podge of beggars' baskets would have given him
a breakfast fit for a dog or pig, while the remaining five cents would
have gone for fiery liquor to quench a burning thirst.

But another mouth had too be fed. All at once this poor degraded man
had risen to a sense of responsibility, and was practicing the virtue of
self-denial. A little child was leading him.

He had no toilette to make, no ablutions to practice. There was neither
pail nor wash-basin in his miserable kennel. So, without any delay of
preparation, he caught up the broken mug and went out, as forlorn a
looking wretch as was to be seen in all that region. Almost every house
that he passed was a grog-shop, and his nerves were all unstrung and his
mouth and throat dry from a night's abstinence. But he was able to go
by without a pause. In a few minutes he returned with a loaf of bread, a
pint of milk and a single dried sausage.

What a good breakfast the two made. Not for a long time had the man so
enjoyed a meal. The sight of little Andy, as he ate with the fine relish
of a hungry child, made his dry bread and sausage taste sweeter than
anything that had passed his lips for weeks.

Something more than the food he had taken steadied the man's nerves and
allayed his thirst. Love was beating back into his heart--love for this
homeless wanderer, whose coming had supplied the lost links in the chain
which bound him to the past and called up memories that had slept almost
the sleep of death for years. Good resolutions began forming in his
mind.

“It may be,” he said to himself as new and better impressions than he
had known for a long time began to crowd upon him, “that God has led
this baby here.”

The thought sent a strange thrill to his soul. He trembled with excess
of feeling. He had once been a religious man; and with the old instinct
of dependence on God, he clasped his hands together with a sudden,
desperate energy, and looking up, cried, in a half-despairing,
half-trustful voice,

“Lord, help me!”

No earnest cry like that ever goes up without an instant answer in the
gift of divine strength. The man felt it in a stronger purpose and a
quickening hope. He was conscious of a new power in himself.

“God being my helper,” he said in the silence of his heart, “I will be a
man again.”

There was a long distance between him and a true manhood. The way
back was over very rough and difficult places, and through dangers and
temptations almost impossible to resist. Who would have faith in him?
Who would help him in his great extremity? How was he to live? Not any
longer by begging or petty theft. He must do honest work. There was no
hope in anything else. If God were to be his helper, he must be honest,
and work. To this conviction he had come.

But what was to be done with Andy while he was away trying to earn
something? The child might get hurt in the street or wander off in his
absence and never find his way back. The care he felt for the little one
was pleasure compared to the thought of losing him.

As for Andy, the comfort of a good breakfast and the feeling that he
had a home, mean as it was, and somebody to care for him, made his heart
light and set his lips to music.

When before had the dreary walls of that poor hovel echoed to the happy
voice of a light-hearted child? But there was another echo to the voice,
and from walls as long a stranger to such sounds as these--the walls in
the chambers of that poor man's memory. A wellnigh lost and ruined soul
was listening to the far-off voices of children. Sunny-haired little
ones were thronging about him; he was looking into their tender eyes;
their soft arms were clinging to his neck; he was holding them tightly
clasped to his bosom.

“Baby,” he said. It was the word that came most naturally to his lips.

Andy, who was sitting where a few sunbeams came in through a rent in
the wall, with the warm light on his head, turned and looked into the
bleared but friendly eyes gazing at him so earnestly.

“I'm going out, baby. Will you stay here till I come back?”

“Yes,” answered the child, “I'll stay.”

“I won't be gone very long, and I'll bring you an apple and something
good for dinner.”

Andy's face lit up and his eyes danced.

“Don't go out until I come back. Somebody might carry you off, and then
I couldn't give you the nice red apple.”

“I'll stay right here,” said Andy, in a positive tone.

“And won't go into the street till I come back?”

“No, I won't.” Andy knit his brows and closed his lips firmly.

“All right, little one,” answered the man, in a cheery sort of voice
that was so strange to his own ears that it seemed like the voice of
somebody else.

Still, he could not feel satisfied. He was living in the midst of
thieves to whom the most insignificant thing upon which they could lay
their hands was booty. Children who had learned to be hard and cruel
thronged the court, and he feared, if he left Andy alone in the hovel,
that it would not only be robbed of its meagre furniture, but the child
subjected to ill-treatment. He had always fastened the door on going
out, but hesitated now about locking Andy in.

All things considered, it was safest, he felt, to lock the door. There
was nothing in the room that could bring harm to the child--no fire or
matches, no stairs to climb or windows out of which he could fall.

“I guess I'd better lock the door, hadn't I, so that nobody can carry
off my little boy?” he asked of Andy.

Andy made no objections. He was ready for anything his kind friend might
propose.

“And you mustn't cry or make a noise. The police might break in if you
did.”

“All right,” said Andy, with the self-assertion of a boy of ten.

The man stroked the child's head and ran his fingers through his hair in
a fond way; then, as one who tore himself from an object of attraction,
went hastily out and locked the door.

And now was to begin a new life. Friendless, debased, repulsive in
appearance, everything about him denoting the abandoned drunkard, this
man started forth to get honest bread. Where should he go? What could
he do? Who would give employment to an object like him? The odds were
fearfully against him--no, not that, either. In outward respects,
fearful enough were the odds, but on the other side agencies invisible
to mortal sight were organizing for his safety. In to his purpose
to lead a new life and help a poor homeless child God's strength was
flowing. Angels were drawing near to a miserable wreck of humanity with
hands outstretched to save. All heaven was coming to the rescue.

He was shuffling along in the direction of a market-house, hoping to
earn a little by carrying home baskets, when he came face to face with
an old friend of his better days, a man with whom he had once held close
business relations.

“Mr. Hall!” exclaimed this man in a tone of sorrowful surprise,
stopping and looking at him with an expression of deepest pity on his
countenance. “This is dreadful!”

“You may well say that, Mr. Graham. It dreadful enough. No one knows
that better than I do,” was answered, with a bitterness that his old
friend felt to be genuine.

“Why, then, lead this terrible life a day longer?” asked the friend.

“I shall not lead it a day longer if God will help me,” was replied,
with a genuineness of purpose that was felt by Mr. Graham.

“Give me your hand on that, Andrew Hall,” he exclaimed. Two hands closed
in a tight grip.

“Where are you going now?” inquired the friend.

“I'm in search of something to do--something that will give me honest
bread. Look at my hand.”

He held it up.

“It shakes, you see. I have not tasted liquor this morning. I could have
bought it, but I did not.”

“Why?”

“I said, 'God being my helper, I will be a man again,' and I am trying.”

“Andrew Hall,” said his old friend, solemnly, as he laid his hand on his
shoulder, “if you are really in earnest--if you do mean, in the help of
God, to try--all will be well. But in his help alone is there any hope.
Have you seen Mr. Paulding?”

“No.”

“Why not?”

“He has no faith in me. I have deceived him too often.”

“What ground of faith is there now?” asked Mr. Graham.

“This,” was the firm but hastily spoken answer. “Last night as I sat in
the gloom of my dreary hovel, feeling so wretched that I wished I could
die, a little child came in--a poor, motherless, homeless wanderer,
almost a baby--and crept down to my heart, and he is lying there still,
Mr. Graham, soft, and warm and precious, a sweet burden to bear. I
bought him a supper and a breakfast of bread and milk with the money,
I had saved for drink, and now, both for his sake and mine, I am out
seeking for work. I have locked him in, so that no one can harm or carry
him away while I earn enough to buy him his dinner, and maybe something
better to wear, poor little homeless thing!”

There was a genuine earnestness and pathos about the man that could not
be mistaken.

“I think,” said Mr. Graham, his voice not quite steady, “that God
brought us together this morning. I know Mr. Paulding. Let us go first
to the mission, and have some talk with him. You must have a bath
and better, and cleaner clothes before you are in a condition to get
employment.”

The bath and a suit of partly-worn but good clean clothes were supplied
at the mission house.

“Now come with me, and I will find you something to do,” said the old
friend.

But Andrew Hall stood hesitating.

“The little child--I told him I'd come back soon. He's locked up all
alone, poor baby!”

He spoke with a quiver in his voice.

“Oh, true, true!” answered Mr. Graham; “the baby must be looked after;”
 and he explained to the missionary.

“I will go round with you and get the child,” said Mr. Paulding. “My
wife will take care of him while you are away with Mr. Graham.”

They found little Andy sitting patiently on the floor. He did not know
the friend who had given him a home and food and loving words, and
looked at him half scared and doubting. But his voice made the child
spring to his feet with a bound, and flushed his thin-face with the joy
of a glad recognition.

Mrs. Paulding received him with a true motherly kindness, and soon a
bath and clean clothing wrought as great a change in the child as they
had done in the man.

“I want your help in saving him,” said Mr. Graham, aside, to the
missionary. “He was once among our most respectable citizens, a good
church-member, a good husband and father, a man of ability and large
influence. Society lost much when it lost him. He is well worth saving,
and we must do it if possible. God sent him this little child to touch
his heart and flood it with old memories, and then he led me to come
down here that I might meet and help him just when his good purposes
made help needful and salvation possible. It is all of his loving care
and wise providence of his tender mercy, which is over the poorest
and weakest and most degraded of his children. Will you give him your
special care?”

“It is the work I am here to do,” answered the missionary. “The Master
came to seek and to save that which was lost, and I am his humble
follower.”

“The child will have to be provided for,” said Mr. Graham. “It cannot,
of course, be left with him. It needs a woman's care.”

“It will not do to separate them,” returned the missionary. “As you
remarked just now, God sent him this little child to touch his heart and
lead him back from the wilderness in which he has strayed. His safety
depends on the touch of that hand. So long as he feels its clasp and its
pull, he will walk in the new way wherein God is setting his feet. No,
no; the child must be left with him--at least for the present. We will
take care of it while he is at work during the day, and at night it can
sleep in his arms, a protecting angel.”

“What kind of a place does he live in?” asked Mr. Graham.

“A dog might dwell there in comfort, but not a man,” replied the
missionary.

Mr. Graham gave him money: “Provide a decent room. If more is required,
let me know.”

He then went away, taking Mr. Hall with him.

“You will find the little one here when you come back,” said Mr.
Paulding as he saw the anxious, questioning look that was cast toward
Andy.

Clothed and in his right mind, but in no condition for work, was Andrew
Hall. Mr. Graham soon noticed, as he walked by his side, that he was in
a very nervous condition.

“What had you for breakfast this morning” he asked, the right thought
coming into his mind.

“Not much. Some bread and a dried sausage.”

“Oh dear! that will never do! You must have something more nutritious--a
good beefsteak and a cup of coffee to steady your nerves. Come.”

And in a few minutes they were in an eating-house. When they came out,
Hall was a different man. Mr. Graham then took him to his store and set
him to work to arrange and file a number of letters and papers, which
occupied him for several hours. He saw that he had a good dinner and at
five o'clock gave him a couple of dollars for his day's work, aid after
many kind words of advice and assurance told him to come back in the
morning, and he would find something else for him to do.

Swiftly as his feet would carry him, Andrew Hall made his way to the
Briar street mission. He did not at first know the clean, handsome child
that lifted his large brown eyes to his face as he came in, nor did the
child know him until he spoke. Then a cry of pleasure broke from the
baby's lips, and he ran to the arms reached out to clasp him.

“We'll go home now,” he said, as if anxious to regain possession of the
child.

“Not back to Grubb's court,” was answered by Mr. Paulding. “If you are
going to be a new man, you must have a new and better home, and I've
found one for you just a little way from here. It's a nice clean room,
and I'll take you there. The rent is six dollars a month, but you can
easily pay that when you get fairly to work.”

The room was in the second story of a small house, better kept than most
of its neighbors, and contained a comfortable bed, with other needed
furniture, scanty, but clean and good. It was to Mr. Hall like the
chamber of a prince compared with what he had known for a long time; and
as he looked around him and comprehended something of the blessed change
that was coming over his life, tears filled his eyes.

“Bring Andy around in the morning,” said the missionary as he turned to
go. “Mrs. Paulding will take good care of him.”

That night, after undressing the child and putting on him the clean
night-gown which good Mrs. Paulding had not forgotten, he said,

“And now Andy will say his prayers.”

Andy looked at him with wide-open, questioning eyes. Mr. Hall saw that
he was not understood.

“You know, 'Now I lay me'?” he said.

“No, don't know it,” replied Andy.

“'Our Father,' then?”

The child knit his brow. It was plain that he did not understand what
his good friend meant.

“You've said your prayers?”

Andy shook his head in a bewildered way.

“Never said your prayers!” exclaimed Mr. Hall, in a voice so full of
surprise and pain that Andy grew half frightened.

“Poor baby!” was said, pityingly, a moment after. Then the question,
“Wouldn't you like to say your prayers?” brought the quick answer,
“Yes.”

“Kneel down, then, right here.” Andy knelt, looking up almost
wonderingly into the face that bent over him.

“We have a good Father in heaven,” said Mr. Hall, with tender reverence
in his tone, pointing upward as he spoke, “He loves us and takes care of
us. He brought you to me, and told me to love you and take care of you
for him, and I'm going to do it. Now, I want you to say a little prayer
to this good and kind Father before you go to bed. Will you?”

“Yes, I will,” came the ready answer.

“Say it over after me. 'Now I lay me down to sleep.'”

Andy repeated the words, his little hands clasped together, and followed
through the verse which thousands of little children in thousands of
Christian homes were saying at the very same hour.

There was a subdued expression on the child's face as he rose from his
knees; and when Mr. Hall lifted him from the floor to lay him in bed, he
drew his arms about his neck and hugged him tightly.

How beautiful the child looked as he lay with shut eyes, the long brown
lashes fringing his flushed cheeks, that seemed already to have gained
a healthy roundness! The soft breath came through his parted lips, about
which still lingered the smile of peace that rested there after his
first prayer was said; his little hands lay upon his breast.

As Mr. Hall sat gazing at this picture there came a rap on his door.
Then the missionary entered. Neither of the men spoke for some moments.
Mr. Paulding comprehended the scene, and felt its sweet and holy
influence.

“Blessed childhood!” he said, breaking the silence. “Innocent childhood!
The nearer we come to it, the nearer we get to heaven.” Then, after a
pause, he added, “And heaven is our only hope, Mr. Hall.”

“I have no hope but in God's strength,” was answered, in a tone of
solemn earnestness.

“God is our refuge, our rock of defence, our hiding-place, our sure
protector. If we trust in him, we shall dwell in safety,” said the
mission. “I am glad to hear you speak of hoping in God. He will give you
strength if you lean upon him, and there is not power enough in all hell
to drag you down if you put forth this God-given strength. But remember,
my friend, that you must use it as if it were your own. You must resist.
God's strength outside of our will and effort is of no use to any of us
in temptation. But looking to our Lord and Saviour in humble yet earnest
prayer for help in the hour of trial and need if we put forth our
strength in resistance of evil, small though it be, then into our weak
efforts will come an influx of divine power that shall surely give us
the victory. Have you a Bible?”

Mr. Hall shook his head.

“I have brought you one;” and the missionary drew a small Bible from his
pocket. “No man is safe without a Bible.”

“Oh, I am glad! I was just wishing for a Bible,” said Hall as he reached
out his hand to receive the precious book.

“If you read it every night and morning--if you treasure its holy
precepts in your memory, and call them up in times of trial, or when
evil enticements are in your way--God can come near to your soul to
succor and to save, for the words of the holy book are his words, and
he is present in them. If we take them into our thoughts, reverently
seeking to obey them, we make a dwelling-place for the Lord, so that he
can abide with us; and in his presence there is safety.”

“And nowhere else,” responded Hall, speaking from a deep sense of
personal helplessness.

“Nowhere else,” echoed the missionary. “And herein lies the hope or the
despair of men. It is pitiful, it is heart-aching, to see the vain but
wild and earnest efforts made by the slaves of intemperance to get free
from their cruel bondage. Thousands rend their fetters every year after
some desperate struggle, and escape. But, alas! how many are captured
and taken back into slavery! Appetite springs upon them in some
unguarded moment, and in their weakness there is none to succor. They do
not go to the Strong for strength, but trust in themselves, and are cast
down. Few are ever redeemed from the slavery of intemperance but those
who pray to God and humbly seek his aid. And so long as they depend on
him, they are safe. He will be as a wall of fire about them.”

As the missionary talked, the face of Mr. Hall underwent a remarkable
change. It grew solemn and very thoughtful. His hands drew together and
the fingers clasped. At the last words of Mr. Paulding a deep groan came
from his heart; and lifting his gaze upward, he cried out,

“Lord, save me, or I perish!”

“Let us pray,” said the missionary, and the two men knelt together,
one with bowed head and crouching body, the other with face uplifted,
tenderly talking to Him who had come down to the lowliest and the vilest
that he might make them pure as the angels, about the poor prodigal now
coming back to his Father's house.

After the prayer, Mr. paulding read a chapter from the Bible aloud, and
then, after words of hope and comfort, went away.




CHAPTER XXI.



“_I TAKE_ reproof to myself,” said Mr. Dinneford. “As one of your board
of managers, I ought to have regarded my position as more than a nominal
one. I understand better now what you said about the ten or twenty of
our rich and influential men who, if they could be induced to look away
for a brief period from their great enterprises, and concentrate thought
and effort upon the social evils, abuse of justice, violations of law,
poverty and suffering that exist here and in other parts of our city,
would inaugurate reforms and set beneficent agencies at work that would
soon produce marvelous changes for good.”

“Ah, yes,” sighed Mr. Paulding. “If we had for just a little while the
help of our strong men--the men of brains and will and money, the men
who are used to commanding success, whose business it is to organize
forces and set impediments at defiance, the men whose word is a kind
of law to the people--how quickly, and as if by magic, would all this
change!

“But we cannot now hope to get this great diversion in our favor. Until
we do we must stand in the breach, small in numbers and weak though we
are--must go on doing our best and helping when we may. Help is help and
good is good, be it ever so small. If I am able to rescue but a single
life where many are drowning, I make just so much head against death and
destruction. Shall I stand off and refuse to put forth my hand because I
cannot save a score?

“Take heart, Mr. Dinneford. Our work is not in vain. Its fruits may be
seen all around. Bad as you find everything, it is not so bad as it was.
When our day-school was opened, the stench from the filthy children who
were gathered in was so great that the teachers were nauseated. They
were dirty in person as well as dirty in their clothing. This would
not do. There was no hope of moral purity while such physical impurity
existed. So the mission set up baths, and made every child go in and
thoroughly wash his body. Then they got children's clothing--new and
old--from all possible sources, and put clean garments on their little
scholars. From the moment they were washed and cleanly clad, a new and
better spirit came upon them. They were more orderly and obedient, and
more teachable. There was, or seemed to be, a tenderer quality in their
voices as they sang their hymns of praise.”

Just then there came a sudden outcry and a confusion of voices from
the street. Mr. Dinneford arose quickly and went to the window. A man,
apparently drunk and in a rage, was holding a boy tightly gripped by the
collar with one hand and cuffing him about the head and face with the
other.

“It's that miserable Blind Jake!” said Mr. Paulding.

In great excitement, Mr. Dinneford threw up the window and called for
the police. At this the man stopped beating the boy, but swore at
him terribly, his sightless eyes rolling and his face distorted in a
frightful way. A policeman who was not far off came now upon the scene.

“What's all this about?” he asked, sternly.

“Jake's drunk again, that's the row,” answered a voice.

“Lock him up, lock him up!” cried two or three from the crowd.

An expression of savage defiance came into the face of the blind man,
and he moved his arms and clenched his fist like one who was bent on
desperate resistance. He was large and muscular, and, now that he was
excited by drink and bad passions, had a look that was dangerous.

“Go home and behave yourself,” said the policeman, not caring to have a
single-handed tussle with the human savage, whose strength and desperate
character he well knew.

Blind Jake, as he was called, stood for a few moments half defiant,
growling and distorting his face until it looked more like a wild
animal's than a man's, then jerked out the words,

“Where's that Pete?” with a sound like the crack of a whip.

The boy he had been beating in his drunken fury, and who did not seem to
be much hurt, came forward from the crowd, and taking him by the hand,
led him away.

“Who is this blind man? I have seen him before,” said Mr. Dinneford.

“You may see him any day standing at the street corners, begging, a
miserable-looking object, exciting the pity of the humane, and gathering
in money to spend in drunken debauchery at night. He has been known to
bring in some days as high as ten and some fifteen dollars, all of which
is wasted in riot before the next morning. He lives just over the way,
and night after night I can hear his howls and curses and laughter
mingled with those of the vile women with whom he herds.”

“Surely this cannot be?” said Mr. Dinneford.

“Surely it is,” was replied. “I know of what I speak. There is hardly a
viler wretch in all our city than this man, who draws hundreds--I
might say, without exaggeration, thousands--of dollars from weak and
tender-hearted people every year to be spent as I have said; and he
is not the only one. Out of this district go hundreds of thieves and
beggars every day, spreading themselves over the city and gathering in
their harvests from our people. I see them at the street corners, coming
out of yards and alley-gates, skulking near unguarded premises and
studying shop-windows. They are all impostors or thieves. Not one of
them is deserving of charity. He who gives to them wastes his money and
encourages thieving and vagrancy. One half of the successful burglaries
committed on dwelling-houses are in consequence of information gained by
beggars. Servant-girls are lured away by old women who come in the guise
of alms-seekers, and by well-feigned poverty and a seeming spirit
of humble thankfulness--often of pious trust in God--win upon their
sympathy and confidence. Many a poor weak girl has thus been led to
visit one of these poor women in the hope of doing her some good,
and many a one has thus been drawn into evil ways. If the people only
understood this matter as I understand it, they would shut hearts and
hands against all beggars. I add beggary as a vice to drinking and
policy-buying as the next most active agency in the work of making
paupers and criminals.”

“But there are deserving poor,” said Dinneford. “We cannot shut our
hearts against all who seek for help.”

“The deserving poor,” replied Mr. Paulding, “are never common
beggars--never those who solicit in the street or importune from house
to house. They try always to help themselves, and ask for aid only when
in great extremity. They rarely force themselves on your attention; they
suffer and die often in dumb despair. We find them in these dreary and
desolate cellars and garrets, sick and starving and silent, often dying,
and minister to them as best we can. If the money given daily to idle
and vicious beggars could be gathered into a fund and dispensed with a
wise Christian charity, it would do a vast amount of good; now it does
only evil.”

“You are doubtless right in this,” returned Mr. Dinneford. “Some one has
said that to help the evil is to hurt the good, and I guess his saying
is near the truth.”

“If you help the vicious and the idle,” was answered, “you simply
encourage vice and idleness, and these never exist without doing a hurt
to society. Withhold aid, and they will be forced to work, and so not
only do something for the common good, but be kept out of the evil ways
into which idleness always leads.

“So you see, sir, how wrong it is to give alms to the vast crew of
beggars that infest our cities, and especially to the children who are
sent out daily to beg or steal as opportunity offers.

“But there is another view of the case,” continued Mr. Paulding, “that
few consider, and which would, I am sure, arouse the people to immediate
action if they understood it as I do. We compare the nation to a great
man. We call it a 'body politic.' We speak of its head, its brain, its
hands, its feet, its arteries and vital forces. We know that no part
of the nation can be hurt without all the other parts feeling in some
degree the shock and sharing the loss or suffering. What is true of the
great man of the nation is true of our smaller communities, our States
and cities and towns. Each is an aggregate man, and the health and
well-being of this man depend on the individual men and the groups
and societies of men by which it is constituted. There cannot be an
unhealthy organ in the human system without a communication of disease
to the whole body. A diseased liver or heart or lung, a useless hand
or foot, an ulcer or local obstruction, cannot exist without injury and
impediment to the whole. In the case of a malignant ulcer, how soon the
blood gets poisoned!

“Now, here is a malignant ulcer in the body politic of our city. Is it
possible, do you think, for it to exist, and in the virulent condition
we find it, and not poison the blood of our whole community? Moral and
spiritual laws are as unvarying in their action, out of natural sight
though they be, as physical laws. Evil and good are as positive entities
as fire, and destroy or consume as surely. As certainly as an ulcer
poisons with its malignant ichor this blood that visits every part of
the body, so surely is this ulcer poisoning every part of our community.
Any one who reflects for a moment will see that it cannot be otherwise.
From this moral ulcer there flows out daily and nightly an ichor as
destructive as that from a cancer. Here theft and robbery and murder
have birth, nurture and growth until full formed and organized, and then
go forth to plunder and destroy. The life and property of no citizen is
safe so long as this community exists. It has its schools of instruction
for thieves and housebreakers, where even little children are educated
to the business of stealing and robbery. Out from it go daily hundreds
of men and women, boys and girls, on their business of beggary, theft
and the enticement of the weak and unwary into crime. In it congregate
human vultures and harpies who absorb most of the plunder that is gained
outside, and render more brutal and desperate the wretches they rob in
comparative safety.

“Let me show you how this is done. A man or a woman thirsting for liquor
will steal anything to get money for whisky. The article stolen may be
a coat, a pair of boots or a dress--something worth from five to twenty
dollars. It is taken to one of these harpies, and sold for fifty cents
or a dollar--anything to get enough for a drunken spree. I am speaking
only of what I know. Then, again, a man or a woman gets stupidly drunk
in one of the whisky-shops. Before he or she is thrown out upon the
street, the thrifty liquor-seller 'goes through' the pockets of the
insensible wretch, and confiscates all he finds. Again, a vile woman has
robbed one of her visitors, and with the money in her pocket goes to a
dram-shop. The sum may be ten dollars or it may be two hundred. A glass
or so unlooses her tongue; she boasts of her exploit, and perhaps shows
her booty. Not once in a dozen times will she take this booty away.
If there are only a few women in the shop, the liquor-seller will most
likely pounce on her at once and get the money by force. There is no
redress. To inform the police is to give information against herself. He
may give her back a little to keep her quiet or he may not, just as he
feels about it. If he does not resort to direct force, he will manage in
some other way to get the money. I could take you to the dram-shop of a
man scarcely a stone's throw from this place who came out of the State's
prison less than four years ago and set up his vile trap where it now
stands. He is known to be worth fifty thousand dollars to-day. How did
he make this large sum? By the profits of his bar? No one believes this.
It has been by robbing his drunken and criminal customers whenever he
could get them in his power.”

“I am oppressed by all this,” said Mr. Dinneford. “I never dreamed of
such a state of things.”

“Nor does one in a hundred of our good citizens, who live in quiet
unconcern with this pest-house of crime and disease in their midst. And
speaking of disease, let me give you another fact that should be widely
known. Every obnoxious epidemic with which our city has been visited in
the last twenty years has originated here--ship fever, relapsing fever
and small-pox--and so, getting a lodgment in the body politic, have
poured their malignant poisons into the blood and diseased the whole.
Death has found his way into the homes of hundreds of our best citizens
through the door opened for him here.”

“Can this be so?” exclaimed Mr. Dinneford.

“It is just as I have said,” was replied. “And how could it be
otherwise? Whether men take heed or not, the evil they permit to lie at
their doors will surely do them harm. Ignorance of a statute, a moral
or a physical law gives no immunity from consequence if the law be
transgressed--a fact that thousands learn every year to their sorrow.
There are those who would call this spread of disease, originating here,
all over our city, a judgment from God, to punish the people for that
neglect and indifference which has left such a hell as this in their
midst. I do not so read it. God has no pleasure in punishments and
retributions. The evil comes not from him. It enters through the door
we have left open, just as a thief enters our dwellings, invited through
our neglect to make the fastenings sure. It comes under the operations
of a law as unvarying as any law in physics. And so long as we have this
epidemic-breeding district in the very heart of our city, we must expect
to reap our periodical harvests of disease and death. What it is to be
next year, or the next, none can tell.”

“Does not your perpetual contact with all this give your mind an
unhealthy tone--a disposition to magnify its disastrous consequences?”
 said Mr. Dinneford.

The missionary dropped his eyes. The flush and animation went out of his
face.

“I leave you to judge for yourself,” he answered, after a brief silence,
and in a voice that betrayed a feeling of disappointment. “You have the
fact before you in the board of health, prison, almshouse, police, house
of refuge, mission and other reports that are made every year to the
people. If they hear not these, neither will they believe, though one
rose from the dead.”

“All is too dreadfully palpable for unbelief,” returned Mr. Dinneford.
“I only expressed a passing thought.”

“My mind may take an unhealthy tone--does often, without doubt,” said
Mr. Paulding. “I wonder, sometimes, that I can keep my head clear and my
purposes steady amid all this moral and physical disorder and suffering.
But exaggeration of either this evil or its consequences is impossible.
The half can never be told.”

Mr. Dinneford rose to go. As he did so, two little Italian children, a
boy and a girl, not over eight years of age, tired, hungry, pinched and
starved-looking little creatures, the boy with a harp slung over his
shoulder, and the girl carrying a violin, went past on the other side.

“Where in the world do all of these little wretches come from?” asked
Mr. Dinneford. “They are swarming our streets of late. Yesterday I saw
a child who could not be over two years of age tinkling her triangle,
while an older boy and girl were playing on a harp and violin. She
seemed so cold and tired that it made me sad to look at her. There is
something wrong about this.”

“Something very wrong,” answered the missionary. “Doubtless you think
these children are brought here by their parents or near relatives. No
such thing. Most of them are slaves. I speak advisedly. The slave-trade
is not yet dead. Its abolition on the coast of Africa did not abolish
the cupidity that gave it birth. And the 'coolie' trade, one of its new
forms, is not confined to the East.”

“I am at a loss for your meaning,” said Mr. Dinneford.

“I am not surprised. The new slave-trade, which has been carried on
with a secresy that is only now beginning to attract attention, has its
source of supply in Southern Italy, from which large numbers of children
are drawn every year and brought to this country.

“The headquarters of this trade--cruel enough in some of its features
to bear comparison with the African slave-trade itself--are in New York.
From this city agents are sent out to Southern Italy every year, where
little intelligence and great poverty exist. These agents tell grand
stories of the brilliant prospects offered to the young in America. Let
me now read to you from the published testimony of one who has made a
thorough investigation of this nefarious business, so that you may get a
clear comprehension of its extent and iniquity.

“He says: 'One of these agents will approach the father of a family, and
after commenting upon the beauty of his children, will tell him that his
boys “should be sent at once to America, where they must in time become
rich.” “There are no poor in America.” “The children should go when
young, so that they may grow up with the people and the better acquire
the language.” “None are too young or too old to go to America.” The
father, of course, has not the means to go himself or to send his
children to this delightful country. The agent then offers to take the
children to America, and to pay forty or fifty dollars to the father
upon his signing an indenture abandoning all claims upon them. He often,
also, promises to pay a hundred or more at the end of a year, but, of
course, never does it.

“'After the agent has collected a sufficient number of children, they
are all supplied with musical instruments, and the trip on foot through
Switzerland and France begins. They are generally shipped to Genoa,
and often to Marseilles, and accomplish the remainder of the journey to
Havre or Calais by easy stages from village to village. Thus they
become a paying investment from the beginning. This journey occupies
the greater portion of the summer months; and after a long trip in the
steerage of a sailing-vessel, the unfortunate children land at Castle
Garden. As the parents never hear from them again, they do not know
whether they are doing well or not.

“'They are too young and ignorant to know how to get themselves
delivered from oppression; they do not speak our language, and find
little or no sympathy among the people whom they annoy. They are
thus left to the mercy of their masters, who treat them brutally, and
apparently without fear of the law or any of its officers. They are
crowded into small, ill-ventilated, uncarpeted rooms, eighteen or twenty
in each, and pass the night on the floor, with only a blanket to protect
them from the severity of the weather. In the mornings they are fed by
their temporary guardian with maccaroni, served in the filthiest manner
in a large open dish in the centre of the room, after which they are
turned out into the streets to beg or steal until late at night.

“'More than all this, when the miserable little outcasts return to their
cheerless quarters, they are required to deliver every cent which they
have gathered during the day; and if the same be deemed insufficient,
the children are carefully searched and soundly beaten.

“'The children are put through a kind of training in the arts of
producing discords on their instruments, and of begging, in the whole of
which the cruelty of the masters and the stolid submission of the pupils
are the predominant features. The worst part of all is that the children
become utterly unfitted for any occupation except vagrancy and theft.'

“You have the answer to your question, 'Where do all these little
wretches come from?'” said the missionary as he laid aside the paper
from which he had been reading. “Poor little slaves!”




CHAPTER XXII.



_EDITH'S_ life, as we have seen, became lost, so to speak, in charities.
Her work lay chiefly with children, She was active in mission-schools
and in two or three homes for friendless little ones, and did much to
extend their sphere of usefulness. Her garments were plain and sombre,
her fair young face almost colorless, and her aspect so nun-like as
often to occasion remark.

Her patience and tender ways with poor little children, especially
with the youngest, were noticed by all who were associated with her.
Sometimes she would show unusual interest in a child just brought to one
of the homes, particularly if it were a boy, and only two or three years
old. She would hover about it and ask it questions, and betray an eager
concern that caused a moment's surprise to those who noticed her. Often,
at such times, the pale face would grow warm with the flush of blood
sent out by her quicker heartbeats, and her eyes would have a depth of
expression and a brightness that made her beauty seem the reflection of
some divine beatitude. Now and then it was observed that her manner
with these little waifs and cast-adrifts that were gathered in from the
street had in it an expression of pain, that her eyes looked at them
sadly, sometimes tearfully. Often she came with light feet and a manner
almost cheery, to go away with eyes cast down and lips set and curved
and steps that were slow and heavy.

Time had not yet solved the mystery of her baby's life or death; and
until it was solved, time had no power to abate the yearning at her
heart, to dull the edge of anxious suspense or to reconcile her to a
Providence that seemed only cruel. In her daily prayers this thought
of cruelty in God often came in to hide his face from her, and she rose
from her knees more frequently in a passion of despairing tears than
comforted. How often she pleaded with God, weeping bitter tears, that he
would give her certainty in place of terrible doubts! Again, she would
implore his loving care over her poor baby, wherever it might be.

So the days wore on, until nearly three years had elapsed since Edith's
child was born.

It was Christmas eve, but there were no busy hands at work, made light
by loving hearts, in the home of Mr. Dinneford. All its chambers were
silent. And yet the coming anniversary was not to go uncelebrated.
Edith's heart was full of interest for the children of the poor, the
lowly, the neglected and the suffering, whom Christ came to save and to
bless. Her anniversary was to be spent with them, and she was looking
forward to its advent with real pleasure.

“We have made provision for four hundred children, said her father. “The
dinner is to be at twelve o'clock, and we must be there by nine or
ten. We shall be busy enough getting everything ready. There are forty
turkeys to cut up and four hundred plates to fill.”

“And many willing hands to do it,” remarked Edith, with a quiet smile;
“ours among the rest.”

“You'd better keep away from there,” spoke up Mrs. Dinneford, with a jar
in her voice. “I don't see what possesses you. You can find poor little
wretches anywhere, if you're so fond of them, without going to Briar
street. You'll bring home the small-pox or something worse.”

Neither Edith nor her father made any reply, and there fell a silence
on the group that was burdensome to all. Mrs. Dinneford felt it most
heavily, and after the lapse of a few minutes withdrew from the room.

“A good dinner to four hundred hungry children, some of them half
starved,” said Edith as her mother shut the door. “I shall enjoy the
sight as much as they will enjoy the feast.”

A little after ten o'clock on the next morning, Mr. Dinneford and Edith
took their way to the mission-school in Briar street. They found from
fifteen to twenty ladies and gentlemen already there, and at work
helping to arrange the tables, which were set in the two long upper
rooms. There were places for nearly four hundred children, and in front
of each was an apple, a cake and a biscuit, and between every four a
large mince pie. The forty turkeys were at the baker's, to be ready at
a little before twelve o'clock, the dinner-hour, and in time for the
carvers, who were to fill the four hundred plates for the expected
guests.

At eleven o'clock Edith and her father went down to the chapel on the
first floor, where the children had assembled for the morning exercises,
that were to continue for an hour.

Edith had a place near the reading-desk where she could see the
countenances of all those children who were sitting side by side in
row after row and filling every seat in the room, a restless, eager,
expectant crowd, half disciplined and only held quiet by the order and
authority they had learned to respect. Such faces as she looked into!
In scarcely a single one could she find anything of true childhood, and
they were so marred by suffering and evil! In vain she turned from one
to another, searching for a sweet, happy look or a face unmarked by pain
or vice or passion. It made her heart ache. Some were so hard and brutal
in their expression, and so mature in their aspect, that they seemed
like the faces of debased men on which a score of years, passed in
sensuality and crime, had cut their deep deforming lines, while others
were pale and wasted, with half-scared yet defiant eyes, and thin,
sharp, enduring lips, making one tearful to look at them. Some were
restless as caged animals, not still for a single instant, hands moving
nervously and bodies swaying to and fro, while others sat stolid and
almost as immovable as stone, staring at the little group of men and
women in front who were to lead them in the exercises of the morning.

At length one face of the many before her fixed the eyes of Edith. It
was the face of a little boy scarcely more than three years old. He was
only a few benches from her, and had been hidden from view by a larger
boy just in front of him. When Edith first noticed this child, he was
looking at her intently from a pair of large, clear brown eyes that had
in them a wistful, hungry expression. His hair, thick and wavy, had
been smoothly brushed by some careful hand, and fell back from a large
forehead, the whiteness and smoothness of which was noticeable in
contrast with those around him. His clothes were clean and good.

As Edith turned again and again to the face of this child, the youngest
perhaps in the room, her heart began to move toward him. Always she
found him with his great earnest eyes upon her. There seemed at last to
be a mutual fascination. His eyes seemed never to move from her face;
and when she tried to look away and get interested in other faces,
almost unconsciously to herself her eyes would wander back, and she
would find herself gazing at the child.

At eleven o'clock Mr. Paulding announced that the exercises for the
morning would begin, when silence fell on the restless company of
undisciplined children. A hymn was read, and then, as the leader struck
the tune, out leaped the voices of these four hundred children, each
singing with a strange wild abandon, many of them swaying their heads
and bodies in time to the measure. As the first lines of the hymn,

     “Jesus, gentle Shepherd, lead us,
     Much we need thy tender care,”

swelled up from the lips of those poor neglected children, the eyes of
Edith grew blind with tears.

After a prayer was offered up, familiar addresses, full of kindness and
encouragement, were made to the children, interspersed with singing and
other appropriate exercises. These were continued for an hour. At their
close the children were taken up stairs to the two long school-rooms,
in which their dinner was to be served. Here were Christmas trees loaded
with presents, wreaths of evergreen on the walls and ceilings, and
illuminated texts hung here and there, and everything was provided to
make the day's influence as beautiful and pleasant as possible to the
poor little ones gathered in from cheerless and miserable homes.

Meantime, the carvers had been very busy at work on the forty
turkeys--large, tender fellows, full of dressing and cooked as nicely as
if they had been intended for a dinner of aldermen--cutting them up and
filling the plates. There was no stinting of the supply. Each plate
was loaded with turkey, dressing, potatoes that had been baked with the
fowls, and a heaping spoonful of cranberry sauce, and as fast as filled
conveyed to the tables by the lady attendants, who had come, many of
them, from elegant homes, to assist the good missionary's wife and the
devoted teachers of the mission-school in this labor of love. And so,
when the four hundred hungry children came streaming into the rooms,
they found tables spread with such bounty as the eyes of many of them
had never looked upon, and kind gentlemen and beautiful ladies already
there to place them at these tables and serve them while eating.

It was curious and touching, and ludicrous sometimes, to see the many
ways in which the children accepted this bountiful supply of food. A
few pounced upon it like hungry dogs, devouring whole platefuls in a few
minutes, but most of them kept a decent restraint upon themselves in the
presence of the ladies and gentlemen, for whom they could not but feel
an instinctive respect. Very few of them could use at fork except in the
most awkward manner. Some tried to cut their meat, but failing in the
task, would seize it with their hands and eagerly convey it to their
hungry mouths. Here and there would be seen a mite of a boy sitting in
a kind of maze before a heaped-up dinner-plate, his hands, strangers, no
doubt, to knife or fork, lying in his lap, and his face wearing a kind
of helpless look. But he did not have to wait long. Eyes that were on
the alert soon saw him; ready hands cut his food, and a cheery voice
encouraged him to eat. If these children had been the sons and daughters
of princes, they could not have been ministered to with a more gracious
devotion to their wants and comfort than was shown by their volunteer
attendants.

Edith, entering into the spirit of the scene, gave herself to the work
in hand with an interest that made her heart glow with pleasure. She had
lost sight of the little boy in whom she had felt so sudden and strong
an interest, and had been searching about for him ever since the
children came up from the chapel. At last she saw him, shut in and
hidden between two larger boys, who were eating with a hungry eagerness
and forgetfulness of everything around them almost painful to see. He
was sitting in front of his heaped-up plate, looking at the tempting
food, with his knife and fork lying untouched on the table. There was a
dreamy, half-sad, half-bewildered look about him.

“Poor little fellow!” exclaimed Edith as soon as she saw him, and in a
moment she was behind his chair.

“Shall I cut it up for you?” she asked as she lifted his knife and fork
from the table.

The child turned almost with a start, and looked up at her with a quick
flash of feeling on his face. She saw that he remembered her.

“Let me fix it all nicely,” she said as she stooped over him and
commenced cutting up his piece of turkey. The child did not look at his
plate while she cut the food, but with his head turned kept his large
eyes on her countenance.

“Now it's all right,” said Edith, encouragingly, as she laid the knife
and fork on his plate, taking a deep breath at the same time, for her
heart beat so rapidly that her lungs was oppressed with the inflowing
of blood. She felt, at the same time, an almost irresistible desire to
catch him up into her arms and draw him lovingly to her bosom. The child
made no attempt to eat, and still kept looking at her.

“Now, my little man,” she said, taking his fork and lifting a piece of
the turkey to his mouth. It touched his palate, and appetite asserted
its power over him; his eyes went down to his plate with a hungry
eagerness. Then Edith put the fork into his hand, but he did not know
how to use it, and made but awkward attempts to take up the food.

Mrs. Paulding, the missionary's wife, came by at the moment, and seeing
the child, put her hand on him, and said, kindly,

“Oh, it's little Andy,” and passed on.

“So your name's Andy?”

“Yes, ma'am.” It was the first time Edith had heard his voice. It fell
sweet and tender on her ears, and stirred her heart strangely.

“Where do you live?”

He gave the name of a street she had never heard of before.

“But you're not eating your dinner. Come, take your fork just so. There!
that's the way;” and Edith took his hand, in which he was still
holding the fork, and lifted two or three mouthfuls, which he ate with
increasing relish. After that he needed no help, and seemed to forget in
the relish of a good dinner the presence of Edith, who soon found others
who needed her service.

The plentiful meal was at last over, and the children, made happy for
one day at least, were slowly dispersing to their dreary homes, drifting
away from the better influences good men and women had been trying to
gather about them even for a little while. The children were beginning
to leave the tables when Edith, who had been busy among them, remembered
the little boy who had so interested her, and made her way to the place
where he had been sitting. But he was not there. She looked into the
crowd of boys and girls who were pressing toward the door, but could not
see the child. A shadow of disappointment came over her feelings, and a
strange heaviness weighed over her heart.

“Oh, I'm so sorry,” she said to herself. “I wanted to see him again.”

She pressed through the crowd of children, and made her way down among
them to the landing below and out upon the street, looking this way and
that, but could not see the child. Then she returned to the upper rooms,
but her search was in vain. Remembering that Mrs. Paulding had called
him by name, she sought for the missionary's wife and made inquiry about
him.

“Do you mean the little fellow I called Andy?” said Mrs. Paulding.

“Yes, that's the one,” returned Edith.

“A beautiful boy, isn't he?”

“Indeed he is. I never saw such eyes in a child. Who is he, Mrs.
Paulding, and what is he doing here? He cannot be the child of depraved
or vicious parents.”

“I do not think he is. But from whence he came no one knows. He drifted
in from some unknown land of sorrow to find shelter on our inhospitable
coast. I am sure that God, in his wise providence, sent him here, for
his coming was the means of saving a poor debased man who is well worth
the saving.”

Then she told in a few words the story of Andy's appearance at Mr.
Hall's wretched hovel and the wonderful changes that followed--how a
degraded drunkard, seemingly beyond the reach of hope and help, had
been led back to sobriety and a life of honest industry by the hand of a
little child cast somehow adrift in the world, yet guarded and guided
by Him who does not lose sight in his good providence of even a single
sparrow.

“Who is this man, and where does he live?” asked Mr. Dinneford, who had
been listening to Mrs. Paulding's brief recital.

“His name is Andrew Hall,” was replied.

“Andrew Hall!” exclaimed Mr. Dinneford, with a start and a look of
surprise.

“Yes, sir. That is his name, and he is now living alone with the child
of whom we have been speaking, not very far from here, but in a much
better neighborhood. He brought Andy around this morning to let him
enjoy the day, and has come for him, no doubt, and taken him home.”

“Give me the street and number, if you please, Mr. Paulding,” said Mr.
Dinneford, with much repressed excitement. “We will go there at once,”
 he added, turning to his daughter.

Edith's face had become pale, and her father felt her hand tremble as
she laid it on his arm.

At this moment a man came up hurriedly to Mrs. Paulding, and said, with
manifest concern,

“Have you seen Andy, ma'am? I've been looking all over, but can't find
him.”

“He was here a little while ago,” answered the missionary's wife. “We
were just speaking of him. I thought you'd taken him home.”

“Mr. Hall!” said Edith's father, in a tone of glad recognition,
extending his hand at the same time.

“Mr. Dinneford!” The two men stood looking at each other, with shut lips
and faces marked by intense feeling, each grasping tightly the other's
hand.

“It is going to be well with you once more, my dear old friend!” said
Mr. Dinneford.

“God being my helper, yes!” was the firm reply. “He has taken my feet
out of the miry clay and set them on firm ground, and I have promised
him that they shall not go down into the pit again. But Andy! I must
look for him.”

And he was turning away.

“I saw Andy a little while ago,” now spoke up a woman who had come in
from the street and heard the last remark.

“Where?” asked Mr. Hall.

“A girl had him, and she was going up Briar street on the run, fairly
dragging Andy after her. She looked like Pinky Swett, and I do believe
it was her. She's been in prison, you know but I guess her time's up.”

Mr. Hall stopped to hear no more, but ran down stairs and up the street,
going in the direction said to have been taken by the woman. Edith sat
down, white and faint.

“Pinky Swett!” exclaimed Mrs. Paulding. “Why, that's the girl who had
the child you were looking after a long time ago, Mr. Dinneford.”

“Yes; I remember the name, and no doubt this is the very child she had
in her possession at that time. Are you sure she has been in prison
for the last two years?” and Mr. Dinneford turned to the woman who had
mentioned her name.

“Oh yes, Sir; I remember all about it,” answered the woman. “She stole a
man's pocket-book, and got two years for it.”

“You know her?”

“Oh yes, indeed! And she's a bad one, I can tell you. She had somebody's
baby round in Grubb's court, and it was 'most starved to death. I heard
it said it belonged to some of the big people up town, and that she was
getting hush-money for it, but I don't know as it was true. People will
talk.”

“Do you know what became of that baby?” asked Edith, with ill-repressed
excitement. Her face was still very pale, and her forehead contracted as
by pain.

“No, ma'am. The police came round asking questions, and the baby wasn't
seen in Grubb's court after that.”

“You think it was Pinky Swett whom you saw just now?”

“I'm dead sure of it, sir,” turning to Mr. Dinneford, who had asked the
question.

“And you are certain it was the little boy named Andy that she had with
her?”

“I'm as sure as death, sir.”

“Did he look frightened?”

“Oh dear, yes, sir--scared as could be. He pulled back all his might,
but she whisked him along as if he'd been only a chicken. I saw them go
round the corner of Clayton street like the wind.”

Mr. Paulding now joined them, and became advised of what had happened.
He looked very grave.

“We shall find the little boy,” he said. “He cannot be concealed by this
wretched woman as the baby was; he is too old for that. The police will
ferret him out. But I am greatly concerned for Mr. Hall. That child is
the bond which holds him at safe anchorage. Break this bond, and he may
drift to sea again. I must go after him.”

And the missionary hurried away.

For over an hour Edith and her father remained at the mission waiting
for some news of little Andy. At the end of this time Mr. Paulding came
back with word that nothing could be learned beyond the fact that a
woman with a child answering to the description of Andy had been seen
getting into an up-town car on Clayton street about one o'clock. She
came, it was said by two or three who professed to have seen her, from
the direction of Briar street. The chief of police had been seen, and he
had already telegraphed to all the stations. Mr. Hall was at the central
station awaiting the result.

After getting a promise from Mr. Paulding to send a messenger the moment
news of Andy was received, Mr. Dinneford and Edith returned home.




CHAPTER XXIII.



_AS_ Edith glanced up, on arriving before their residence, she saw for
a moment her mother's face at the window. It vanished like the face of
a ghost, but not quick enough to prevent Edith from seeing that it was
almost colorless and had a scared look. They did not find Mrs. Dinneford
in the parlor when they came in, nor did she make her appearance until
an hour afterward, when dinner was announced. Then it was plain to both
her husband and daughter that something had occurred since morning to
trouble her profoundly. The paleness noticed by Edith at the window and
the scared look remained. Whenever she turned her eyes suddenly upon
her mother, she found her looking at her with a strange, searching
intentness. It was plain that Mrs. Dinneford saw in Edith's face as
great a change and mystery as Edith saw in hers, and the riddle of her
husband's countenance, so altered since morning, was harder even than
Edith's to solve.

A drearier Christmas dinner, and one in which less food was taken
by those who ate it, could hardly have been found in the city. The
Briar-street feast was one of joy and gladness in comparison. The
courses came and went with unwonted quickness, plates bearing off the
almost untasted viands which they had received. Scarcely a word was
spoken during the meal. Mrs. Dinneford asked no question about the
dinner in Briar street, and no remark was made about it by either
Edith or her father. In half the usual time this meal was ended. Mrs.
Dinneford left the table first, and retired to her own room. As she did
so, in taking her handkerchief from her pocket, she drew out a letter,
which fell unnoticed by her upon the floor. Mr. Dinneford was about
calling her attention to it when Edith, who saw his purpose and was near
enough to touch his hand, gave a quick signal to forbear. The instant
her mother was out of the room she sprang from her seat, and had just
secured the letter when the dining-room door was pushed open, and Mrs.
Dinneford came in, white and frightened. She saw the letter in Edith's
hand, and with a cry like some animal in pain leaped upon her and tried
to wrest it from her grasp. But Edith held it in her closed hand with
a desperate grip, defying all her mother's efforts to get possession of
it. In her wild fear and anger Mrs. Dinneford exclaimed,

“I'll kill you if you don't give me that letter!” and actually, in
her blind rage, reached toward the table as if to get a knife. Mr.
Dinneford, who had been for a moment stupefied, now started forward,
and throwing his arms about his wife, held her tightly until Edith
could escape with the letter, not releasing her until the sound of his
daughter's retiring feet were no longer heard. By this time she had
ceased to struggle; and when he released her, she stood still in a
passive, dull sort of way, her arms falling heavily to her sides. He
looked into her face, and saw that the eyes were staring wildly and
the muscles in a convulsive quiver. Then starting and reaching out
helplessly, she fell forward. Catching her in his arms, Mr. Dinneford
drew her toward a sofa, but she was dead before he could raise her from
the floor.

When Edith reached her room, she shut and locked the door. Then all her
excitement died away. She sat down, and opening the letter with hands
that gave no sign of inward agitation or suspense, read it through. It
was dated at Havana, and was as follows:

“MRS. HELEN DINNEFORD: MADAM--My physician tells me that I cannot live a
week--may die at any moment; and I am afraid to die with one unconfessed
and unatoned sin upon my conscience--a sin into which I was led by you,
the sharer of my guilt. I need not go into particulars. You know to what
I refer--the ruin of an innocent, confiding young man, your daughter's
husband. I do not wonder that he lost his reason! But I have information
that his insanity has taken on the mildest form, and that his friends
are only keeping him at the hospital until they can get a pardon from
the governor. It is in your power and mine to establish his innocence
at once. I leave you a single mouth in which to do this, and at the same
time screen yourself, if that be possible. If, at the end of a month, it
is not done, then a copy of this letter, with a circumstantial statement
of the whole iniquitous affair, will be placed in the hands of your
husband, and another in the hands of your daughter. I have so provided
for this that no failure can take place. So be warned and make the
innocence of George Granger as clear as noonday.

“LLOYD FREELING.”

Twice Edith read this letter through before a sign of emotion was
visible. She looked about the room, down at herself, and again at the
letter.

“Am I really awake?” she said, beginning to tremble. Then the glad
but terrible truth grappled with her convictions, and through the wild
struggle and antagonism, of feeling that shook her soul there shone into
her face a joy so great that the pale features grew almost radiant.

“Innocent! innocent!” fell from her lips, over which crept a smile of
ineffable love. But it faded out quickly, and left in its place a shadow
of ineffable pain.

“Innocent! innocent!” she repeated, now clasping her hands and lifting
her eyes heavenward. “Dear Lord and Saviour! My heart is full of
thankfulness! Innocent! Oh, let it be made as clear as noonday! And my
baby, Lord--oh, my baby, my baby! Give him back to me!”

She fell forward upon her bed, kneeling, her face hidden among the
pillows, trembling and sobbing.

“Edith! Edith!” came the agitated voice of her father from without. She
rose quickly, and opening the door, saw his pale, convulsed countenance.

“Quick! quick! Your mother!” and Mr. Dinneford turned and ran down
stairs, she following. On reaching the dining-room, Edith found her
mother lying on a sofa, with the servants about her in great excitement.
Better than any one did she comprehend what she saw.

“Dead,” fell almost coldly from her lips.

“I have sent for Dr. Radcliffe. It may only be a fainting fit,” answered
Mr. Dinneford.

Edith stood a little way off from her mother, as if held from personal
contact by an invisible barrier, and looked upon her ashen face without
any sign of emotion.

“Dead, and better so,” she said, in an undertone heard only by her
father.

“My child! don't, don't!” exclaimed Mr. Dinneford in a deprecating
whisper.

“Dead, and better so,” she repeated, firmly.

While the servants chafed the hands and feet of Mrs. Dinneford, and did
what they could in their confused way to bring her back to life, Edith
stood a little way off, apparently undisturbed by what she saw, and
not once touching her mother's body or offering a suggestion to the
bewildered attendants.

When Dr. Radcliffe came and looked at Mrs. Dinneford, all saw by his
countenance that he believed her dead. A careful examination proved the
truth of his first impression. She was done with life in this world.

As to the cause of her death, the doctor, gathering what he could from
her husband, pronounced it heart disease. The story told outside was
this--so the doctor gave it, and so it was understood: Mrs. Dinneford
was sitting at the table when her head was seen to sink forward, and
before any one could get to her she was dead. It was not so stated to
him by either Mr. Dinneford or Edith, but he was a prudent man, and
careful of the good fame of his patients. Family affairs he held as
sacred trusts. We'll he knew that there had been a tragedy in this
home--a tragedy for which he was in part, he feared, responsible; and he
did not care to look into it too closely. But of all that was involved
in this tragedy he really knew little. Social gossip had its guesses
at the truth, often not very remote, and he was familiar with these,
believing little or much as it suited him.

It is not surprising that Edith's father, on seeing the letter of Lloyd
Freeling, echoed his daughter's words, “Better so!”

Not a tear was shed on the grave of Mrs. Dinneford. Husband and daughter
saw her body carried forth and buried out of sight with a feeling of
rejection and a sense of relief. Death had no power to soften their
hearts toward her. Charity had no mantle broad enough to cover her
wickedness; filial love was dead, and the good heart of her husband
turned away at remembrance with a shudder of horror.

Yes, it was “better so!” They had no grief, but thankfulness, that she
was dead.

On the morning after the funeral there came a letter from Havana
addressed to Mr. Dinneford. It was from the man Freeling. In it he
related circumstantially all the reader knows about the conspiracy to
destroy Granger. The letter enclosed an affidavit made by Freeling, and
duly attested by the American consul, in which he stated explicitly
that all the forgeries were made by himself, and that George Granger was
entirely ignorant of the character of the paper he had endorsed with the
name of the firm.

Since the revelation made to Edith by Freeling's letter to her mother,
all the repressed love of years, never dead nor diminished, but only
chained, held down, covered over, shook itself free from bonds and the
wrecks and debris of crushed hopes. It filled her heart with an agony
of fullness. Her first passionate impulse was to go to him and throw
herself into his arms. But a chilling thought came with the impulse, and
sent all the outgoing heart-beats back. She was no longer the wife of
George Granger. In a weak hour she had yielded to the importunities of
her father, and consented to an application for divorce. No, she was no
longer the wife of George Granger. She had no right to go to him. If it
were true that reason had been in part or wholly restored, would he not
reject her with scorn? The very thought made her heart stand still. It
would be more than she could bear.




CHAPTER XXIV.



_NO_ other result than the one that followed could have been hoped for.
The strain upon Edith was too great. After the funeral of her
mother mind and body gave way, and she passed several weeks in a
half-unconscious state.

Two women, leading actors in this tragedy of life, met for the first
time in over two years--Mrs. Hoyt, _alias_ Bray, and Pinky Swett. It had
not gone very well with either of them during that period. Pinky, as the
reader knows, had spent the time in prison, and Mrs. Bray, who had also
gone a step too far in her evil ways, was now hiding from the police
under a different name from any heretofore assumed. They met, by what
seemed an accident, on the street.

“Pinky!”

“Fan!”

Dropped from their lips in mutual surprise and pleasure. A little while
they held each other's hands, and looked into each other's faces with
keenly-searching, sinister eyes, one thought coming uppermost in the
minds of both--the thought of that long-time-lost capital in trade, the
cast-adrift baby.

From the street they went to Mrs. Bray's hiding-place a small
ill-furnished room in one of the suburbs of the city--and there took
counsel together.

“What became of that baby?” was one of Mrs. Bray's first questions.

“It's all right,” answered Pinky.

“Do you know where it is?”

“Yes.”

“And can you put your hand on it?”

“At any moment.”

“Not worth the trouble of looking after now,” said Mrs. Bray, assuming
an indifferent manner.

“Why?” Pinky turned on her quickly.

“Oh, because the old lady is dead.”

“What old lady?”

“The grandmother.”

“When did she die?”

“Three or four weeks ago.”

“What was her name?” asked Pinky.

Mrs. Bray closed her lips tightly and shook her head.

“Can't betray thatt secret,” she replied.

“Oh, just as you like;” and Pinky gave her head an impatient toss. “High
sense of honor! Respect for the memory of a departed friend! But it
won't go down with me, Fan. We know each other too well. As for the
baby--a pretty big one now, by the way, and as handsome a boy as you'll
find in all this city--he's worth something to somebody, and I'm on that
somebody's track. There's mother as well as a grandmother in the case,
Fan.”

Mrs. Bray's eyes flashed, and her face grew red with an excitement she
could not hold back. Pinky watched her keenly.

“There's somebody in this town to-day who would give thousands to get
him,” she added, still keeping her eyes on her companion. “And as I was
saying, I'm on that somebody's track. You thought no one but you and
Sal Long knew anything, and that when she died you had the secret all to
yourself. But Sal didn't keep mum about it.”

“Did she tell you anything?” demanded Mrs. Bray, thrown off her guard by
Pinky's last assertion.

“Enough for me to put this and that together and make it nearly all
out,” answered Pinky, with great coolness. “I was close after the game
when I got caught myself. But I'm on the track once more, and don't mean
to be thrown off. A link or two in the chain of evidence touching the
parentage of this child, and I am all right. You have these missing
links, and can furnish them if you will. If not, I am bound to find
them. You know me, Fan. If I once set my heart on doing a thing, heaven
and earth can't stop me.”

“You're devil enough for anything, I know, and can lie as fast as you
can talk,” returned Mrs. Bray, in considerable irritation. “If I could
believe a word you said! But I can't.”

“No necessity for it,” retorted Pinky, with a careless toss of her head.
“If you don't wish to hunt in company, all right. I'll take the game
myself.”

“You forget,” said Mrs. Bray, “I can spoil your game.”

“Indeed! how?”

“By blowing the whole thing to Mr.--”

“Mr. who?” asked Pinky, leaning forward eagerly as her companion paused
without uttering the name that was on her lips.

“Wouldn't you like to know?” Mrs. Bray gave a low tantalizing laugh.

“I'm not sure that I would, from you. I'm bound to know somehow, and it
will be cheapest to find out for myself,” replied Pinky, hiding her real
desire, which was to get the clue she sought from Mrs. Bray, and which
she alone could give. “As for blowing on me, I wouldn't like anything
better. I wish you'd call on Mr. Somebody at once, and tell him I've
got the heir of his house and fortune, or on Mrs. Somebody, and tell her
I've got her lost baby. Do it, Fan; that's a deary.”

“Suppose I were to do so?” asked Mrs. Bray, repressing the anger that
was in her heart, and speaking with some degree of calmness.

“What then?”

“The police would be down on you in less than an hour.”

“And what then?”

“Your game would be up.”

Pinky laughed derisively:

“The police are down on me now, and have been coming down on me for
nearly a month past. But I'm too much for them. I know how to cover my
tracks.”

“Down on you! For what?”

“They're after the boy.”

“What do they know about him? Who set them after him?”

“I grabbed him up last Christmas down in Briar street after being on his
track for a week, and them that had him are after him sharp.”

“Who had him?”

“I'm a little puzzled at the rumpus it has kicked up,” said Pinky, in
reply. “It's stirred things amazingly.”

“How?”

“Oh, as I said, the police are after me sharp. They've had me before the
mayor twice, and got two or three to swear they saw me pick up the child
in Briar street and run off with him. But I denied it all.”

“And I can swear that you confessed it all to me,” said Mrs. Bray, with
ill-concealed triumph.

“It won't do, Fan,” laughed Pinky. “They'll not be able to find him
any more then than now. But I wish you would. I'd like to know this Mr.
Somebody of whom you spoke. I'll sell out to him. He'll bid high, I'm
thinking.”

Baffled by her sharper accomplice, and afraid to trust her with the
secret of the child's parentage lest she should rob her of the last gain
possible to receive out of this great iniquity, Mrs. Bray became wrought
up to a state of ungovernable passion, and in a blind rage pushed Pinky
from her room. The assault was sudden and unexpected---so sudden that
Pinky, who was the stronger, had no time to recover herself and take
the offensive before she was on the outside and the door shut and locked
against her. A few impotent threats and curses were interchanged between
the two infuriated women, and then Pinky went away.

On the day following, as Mr. Dinneford was preparing to go out, he was
informed that a lady had called and was waiting down stairs to see him.
She did not send her card nor give her name. On going into the room
where the visitor had been shown, he saw a little woman with a dark,
sallow complexion. She arose and came forward a step or two in evident
embarrassment.

“Mr. Dinneford?” she said.

“That is my name, madam,” was replied.

“You do not know me?”

Mr. Dinneford looked at her closely, and then answered,

“I have not that pleasure, madam.”

The woman stood for a moment or two, hesitating.

“Be seated, madam,” said Mr. Dinneford.

She sat down, seeming very ill at ease. He took a chair in front of her.

“You wish to see me?”

“Yes, sir, and on a matter that deeply concerns you. I was your
daughter's nurse when her baby was born.”

She paused at this. Mr. Dinneford had caught his breath. She saw the
almost wild interest that flushed his face.

After waiting a moment for some response, she added, in a low, steady
voice,

“That baby is still alive, and I am the only person who can clearly
identify him.”

Mr. Dinneford did not reply immediately. He saw by the woman's face
that she was not to be trusted, and that in coming to him she had only
sinister ends in view. Her story might be true or false. He thought
hurriedly, and tried to regain exterior calmness. As soon as he felt
that he could speak without betraying too much eagerness, he said, with
an appearance of having recognized her,

“You are Mrs.----?”

He paused, but she did not supply the name.

“Mrs.----? Mrs.----? what is it?”

“No matter, Mr. Dinneford,” answered Mrs. Bray, with the coolness and
self-possession she had now regained. “What I have just told you is
true. If you wish to follow up the matter--wish to get possession of
your daughter's child--you have the opportunity; if not, our interview
ends, of course;” and she made a feint, as if going to rise.

“Is it the child a woman named Pinky Swett stole away from Briar street
on Christmas day?” asked Mr. Dinneford, speaking from a thought that
flashed into his mind, and so without premeditation. He fixed his eyes
intently on Mrs. Bray's face, and saw by its quick changes and blank
surprise that he had put the right question. Before she could recover
herself and reply, he added,

“And you are, doubtless, this same Pinky Swett.”

The half smile, half sneer, that curved the woman's lips, told Mr.
Dinneford that he was mistaken.

“No, sir,” was returned, with regained coolness. “I am not 'this same
Pinky Swett.' You are out there.”

“But you know her?”

“I don't know anything just now, sir,” answered the woman, with a chill
in her tones. She closed her lips tightly, and shrunk back in her chair.

“What, then, are your here for?” asked Mr. Dinneford, showing
considerable sternness of manner.

“I thought you understood,” returned the woman. “I was explicit in my
statement.”

“Oh, I begin to see. There is a price on your information,” said Mr.
Dinneford.

“Yes, sir. You might have known that from the first. I will be frank
with you.”

“But why have you kept this secret for three years? Why did you not come
before?” asked Mr. Dinneford.

“Because I was paid to keep the secret. Do you understand?”

Too well did Mr. Dinneford understand, and it was with difficulty he
could suppress a groan as his head drooped forward and his eyes fell to
the floor.

“It does not pay to keep it any longer,” added the woman.

Mr. Dinneford made no response.

“Gain lies on the other side. The secret is yours, if you will have it.”

“At what price?” asked Mr. Dinneford, without lifting his eyes.

“One thousand dollars, cash in hand.”

“On production of the child and proof of its identity?”

Mrs. Bray took time to answer. “I do not mean to have any slip in this
matter,” she said. “It was a bad business at the start, as I told Mrs.
Dinneford, and has given me more trouble than I've been paid for, ten
times over. I shall not be sorry to wash my hands clean of it; but
whenever I do so, there must be compensation and security. I haven't the
child, and you may hunt me to cover with all the police hounds in the
city, and yet not find him.”

“If I agree to pay your demand,” replied Mr. Dinneford, “it can only be
on production and identification of the child.”

“After which your humble servant will be quickly handed over to the
police,” a low, derisive laugh gurgling in the woman's throat.

“The guilty are ever in dread, and the false always in fear of
betrayal,” said Mr. Dinneford. “I can make no terms with you for any
antecedent reward. The child must be in my possession and his parentage
clearly proved before I give you a dollar. As to what may follow to
yourself, your safety will lie in your own silence. You hold, and will
still hold, a family secret that we shall not care to have betrayed. If
you should ever betray it, or seek, because of its possession, to annoy
or prey upon us, I shall consider all honorable contract we may have at
an end, and act accordingly.”

“Will you put in writing, an obligation to pay me one thousand dollars
in case I bring the child and prove its identity?”

“No; but I will give you my word of honor that this sum shall be placed
in your hands whenever you produce the child.”

Mrs. Bray remained silent for a considerable time, then, as if
satisfied, arose, saying,

“You will hear from me by to-morrow or the day after, at farthest.
Good-morning.”

As she was moving toward the door Mr. Dinneford said,

“Let me have your name and residence, madam.”

The woman quickened her steps, partly turning her head as she did so,
and said, with a sinister curl of the lip,

“No, I thank you, sir.”

In the next moment she was gone.




CHAPTER XXV.



_NOTHING_ of all this was communicated to Edith. After a few weeks
of prostration strength came slowly back to mind and body, and with
returning strength her interest in her old work revived. Her feet went
down again into lowly ways, and her hands took hold of suffering.

Immediately on receipt of Freeling's letter and affidavit, Mr. Dinneford
had taken steps to procure a pardon for George Granger. It came within
a few days after the application was made, and the young man was taken
from the asylum where he had been for three years.

Mr. Dinneford went to him with Freeling's affidavit and the pardon, and
placing them in his hands, watched him closely to see the effect they
would produce. He found him greatly changed in appearance, looking older
by many years. His manner was quiet, as that of one who had learned
submission after long suffering. But his eyes were clear and steady, and
without sign of mental aberration. He read Freeling's affidavit first,
folded it in an absent kind of way, as if he were dreaming, reopened and
read it through again. Then Mr. Dinneford saw a strong shiver pass over
him; he became pale and slightly convulsed. His face sunk in his hands,
and he sat for a while struggling with emotions that he found it almost
impossible to hold back.

When he looked up, the wild struggle was over.

“It is too late,” he said.

“No, George, it is never too late,” replied Mr. Dinneford. “You have
suffered a cruel wrong, but in the future there are for you, I doubt
not, many compensations.”

He shook his head in a dreary way, murmuring,

“I have lost too much.”

“Nothing that may not be restored. And in all you have not lost a good
conscience.”

“No, thank God!” answered the young man, with a sudden flush in his
face. “But for that anchor to my soul, I should have long ago drifted
out to sea a helpless wreck. No thank God! I have not lost a good
conscience.”

“You have not yet read the other paper,” said Mr. Dinneford. “It is your
pardon.”

“Pardon!” An indignant flash came into Granger's eyes. “Oh, sir, that
hurts too deeply. Pardon! I am not a criminal.”

“Falsely so regarded in the eyes of the law, but now proved to be
innocent, and so expressed by the governor. It is not a pardon in any
sense of remission, but a declaration of innocence and sorrow for the
undeserved wrongs you have suffered.”

“It is well,” he answered, gloomily--“the best that can be done; and I
should be thankful.”

“You cannot be more deeply thankful than I am, George.” Mr. Dinneford
spoke with much feeling. “Let us bury this dreadful past out of our
sight, and trust in God for a better future. You are free again, and
your innocence shall, so far as I have power to do it, be made as clear
as noonday. You are at liberty to depart from here at once. Will you go
with me now?”

Granger lifted a half-surprised look to Mr. Dinneford's face.

“Thank you,” he replied, after a few moments' thought. “I shall never
forget your kindness, but I prefer remaining here for a few days, until
I can confer with my friends and make some decision as to the future.”

Granger's manner grew reserved, almost embarrassed. Mr. Dinneford was
not wrong in his impression of the cause. How could he help thinking of
Edith, who, turning against him with the rest, had accepted the theory
of guilt and pronounced her sentence upon him, hardest of all to bear?
So it appeared to him, for he had nothing but the hard fact before him
that she had applied for and obtained a divorce.

Yes, it was the thought of Edith that drew Granger back and covered him
with reserve. What more could Mr. Dinneford say? He had not considered
all the hearings of this unhappy case; but now that he remembered the
divorce, he began to see, how full of embarrassment it was, and how
delicate the relation he bore to this unhappy victim of his wife's
dreadful crime.

What could he say for Edith? Nothing! He knew that her heart had never
turned itself away from this man, though she had, under a pressure she
was not strong enough to resist, turned her back upon him and cast aside
his dishonored name, thus testifying to the world that she believed him
base and criminal. If he should speak of her, would not the young man
answer with indignant scorn?

“Give me the address of your friends, and I will call upon them
immediately,” said Mr. Dinneford, replying, after a long silence, to
Granger's last remark. “I am here to repair, to any extent that in me
lies the frightful wrongs you have suffered. I shall make your cause my
own, and never rest until every false tarnish shall be wiped from your
name. In honor and conscience I am bound to this.”

Looking at the young man intently, he saw a grateful response in the
warmer color that broke into his face and in the moisture that filled
his eyes.

“I would be base if I were not thankful, Mr. Dinneford,” Granger
replied. “But you cannot put yourself in my place, cannot know what I
have suffered, cannot comprehend the sense of wrong and cruel rejection
that has filled my soul with the very gall of bitterness. To be cast out
utterly, suddenly and without warning from heaven into hell, and for no
evil thought or act! Ah, sir! you do not understand.”

“It was a frightful ordeal, George,” answered Mr. Dinneford, laying his
hand on Granger with the tenderness of a father. “But, thank God! it
is over. You have stood the terrible heat, and now, coming out of the
furnace, I shall see to it that not even the smell of fire remain upon
your garments.”

Still the young man could not be moved from his purpose to remain at the
asylum until he had seen and conferred with his friends, in whose hands
Mr. Dinneford placed the governor's pardon and the affidavit of Lloyd
Freeling setting forth his innocence.

Mrs. Bray did not call on Mr. Dinneford, as she had promised. She had
quarreled with Pinky Swett, as the reader will remember, and in a fit
of blind anger thrust her from the room. But in the next moment she
remembered that she did not know where the girl lived, and if she lost
sight of her now, might not again come across her for weeks or months.
So putting on her hat and cloak hurriedly, she waited until she heard
Pinky going down stairs, and then came out noiselessly, and followed her
into the street. She had to be quick in her movements, for Pinky, hot
with anger, was dashing off at a rapid speed. For three or four blocks
Mrs. Bray kept her in view; but there being only a few persons in the
street, she had to remain at a considerable distance behind, so as not
to attract her attention. Suddenly, she lost sight of Pinky. She had
looked back on hearing a noise in the street; turning again, she could
see nothing of the girl. Hurrying forward to the corner which Pinky had
in all probability turned, Mrs. Bray looked eagerly up and down, but to
her disappointment Pinky was not in sight.

“Somewhere here. I thought it was farther off,” said Mrs. Bray to
herself. “It's too bad that I should have lost sight of her.”

She stood irresolute for a little while, then walked down one of the
blocks and back on the other side. Halfway down, a small street or alley
divided the block.

“It's in there, no doubt,” said Mrs. Bray, speaking to herself again.
On the corner was a small shop in which notions and trimmings were sold.
Going into this, she asked for some trifling articles, and while looking
over them drew the woman who kept the shop into conversation.

“What kind of people live in this little street?” she inquired, in a
half-careless tone.

The woman smiled as she answered, with a slight toss of the head,

“Oh, all kinds.”

“Good, bad and indifferent?”

“Yes, white sheep and black.”

“So I thought. The black sheep will get in. You can't keep 'em out.”

“No, and 'tisn't much use trying,” answered the shop-keeper, with a
levity of manner not unmarked by Mrs. Bray, who said,

“The black sheep have to live as well as the white ones.”

“Just so. You hit the nail there.”

“And I suppose you find their money as good as that of the whitest?”

“Oh yes.”

“And quite as freely spent?”

“As to that,” answered the woman, who was inclined to be talkative and
gossipy, “we make more out of the black sheep than out of the white
ones. They don't higgle so about prices. Not that we have two prices,
but you see they don't try to beat us down, and never stop to worry
about the cost of a thing if they happen to fancy it. They look and buy,
and there's the end of it.”

“I understand,” remarked Mrs. Bray, with a familiar nod. “It may be
wicked to say so; but if I kept a store like this, I'd rather have the
sinners for customers than the saints.”

She had taken a seat at the counter; and now, leaning forward upon her
arms and looking at the shop-woman in a pleasant, half-confidential way,
said,

“You know everybody about here?”

“Pretty much.”

“The black sheep as well as the white?”

“As customers.”

“Of course; that's all I mean,” was returned. “I'd be sorry if you knew
them in any other way--some of them, at least.” Then, after a pause, “Do
you know a girl they call Pinky?”

“I may know her, but not by that name. What kind of a looking person is
she?”

“A tall, bold-faced, dashing, dare-devil sort of a girl, with a snaky
look in her eyes. She wears a pink hat with a white feather.”

“Yes, I think I have seen some one like that, but she's not been around
here long.”

“When did you see her last?”

“If it's the same one you mean, I saw her go by here not ten minutes
ago. She lives somewhere down the alley.”

“Do you know the house?”

“I do not; but it can be found, no doubt. You called her Pinky.”

“Yes. Her name is Pinky Swett.”

“O-h! o-h!” ejaculated the shop-woman, lifting her eyebrows in a
surprised way. “Why, that's the girl the police were after. They said
she'd run off with somebody's child.”

“Did they arrest her?” asked Mrs. Bray, repressing, as far as possible,
all excitement.

“They took her off once or twice, I believe, but didn't make anything
out of her. At any rate, the child was not found. It belonged, they
said, to a rich up-town family that the girl was trying to black-mail.
But I don't see how that could be.”

“The child isn't about here?”

“Oh dear, no! If it was, it would have been found long before this, for
the police are hunting around sharp. If it's all as they say, she's got
it hid somewhere else.”

While Mrs. Bray talked with the shop-woman, Pinky, who had made a
hurried call at her room, only a hundred yards away, was going as fast
as a street-car could take her to a distant part of the city. On leaving
the car at the corner of a narrow, half-deserted street, in which the
only sign of life was a child or two at play in the snow and a couple
of goats lying on a cellar-door, she walked for half the distance of
a block, and then turned into a court lined on both sides with small,
ill-conditioned houses, not half of them tenanted. Snow and ice blocked
the little road-way, except where a narrow path had been cut along close
to the houses.

Without knocking, Pinky entered one of these poor tenements. As she
pushed open the door, a woman who was crouching down before a small
stove, on which something was cooking, started up with a look of
surprise that changed to one of anxiety and fear the moment she
recognized her visitor.

“Is Andy all right?” cried Pinky, alarm in her face.

The woman tried to stammer out something, but did not make herself
understood. At this, Pinky, into whose eyes flashed a fierce light,
caught her by the wrists in a grip that almost crushed the bones.

“Out with it! where is Andy?”

Still the frightened woman could not speak.

“If that child isn't here, I'll murder you!” said Pinky, now white with
anger, tightening her grasp.

At this, with a desperate effort, the woman flung her off, and catching
up a long wooden bench, raised it over her head.

“If there's to be any murder going on,” she said, recovering her powers
of speech, “I'll take the first hand! As for the troublesome brat, he's
gone. Got out of the window and climbed down the spout. Wonder he wasn't
killed. Did fall--I don't know how far--and must have hurt himself,
for I heard a noise as if something heavy had dropped in the yard, but
thought it was next door. Half an hour afterward, in going up stairs
and opening the door of the room where I kept him locked in, I found it
empty and the window open. That's the whole story. I ran out and looked
everywhere, but he was off. And now, if the murder is to come, I'm going
to be in first.”

And she still kept the long wooden bench poised above her head.

Pinky saw a dangerous look in the woman's eyes.

“Put that thing down,” she cried, “and don't be a fool. Let me see;”
 and she darted past the woman and ran up stairs. She found the window
of Andy's prison open and the print of his little fingers on the
snow-covered sill outside, where he had held on before dropping to the
ground, a distance of many feet. There was no doubt now in her mind as
to the truth of the woman's story. The child had made his escape.

“Have you been into all the neighbors' houses?” asked Pinky as she came
down hastily.

“Into some, but not all,” she replied.

“How long is it since he got away?”

“More than two hours.”

“And you've been sticking down here, instead of ransacking every hole
and corner in the neighborhood. I can hardly keep my hands off of you.”

The woman was on the alert. Pinky saw this, and did not attempt to put
her threat into execution. After pouring out her wrath in a flood
of angry invectives, she went out and began a thorough search of the
neighborhood, going into every house for a distance of three or four
blocks in all directions. But she could neither find the child nor get
the smallest trace of him. He had dropped out of sight, so far as she
was concerned, as completely as if he had fallen into the sea.




CHAPTER XXVI.



_DAY_ after day Mr. Dinneford waited for the woman who was to restore
the child of Edith, but she did not come. Over a week elapsed, but she
neither called nor sent him a sign or a word. He dared not speak
about this to Edith. She was too weak in body and mind for any further
suspense or strain.

Drew Hall had been nearly thrown down again by the events of that
Christmas day. The hand of a little child was holding him fast to a
better life; but when that hand was torn suddenly away from his grasp,
he felt the pull of evil habits, the downward drift of old currents. His
steps grew weak, his knees trembled. But God did not mean that he should
be left alone. He had reached down to him through the hand of a little
child, had lifted him up and led him into a way of safety; and now that
this small hand, the soft, touch of which had gone to his heart and
stirred him with old memories, sad and sweet and holy, had dropped away
from him, and he seemed to be losing his hold of heaven, God sent
him, in Mr. Dinneford, an angel with a stronger hand. There were old
associations that held these men together. They had been early and
attached friends, and this meeting, after many years of separation,
under such strange circumstances, and with a common fear and anxiety
at heart, could not but have the effect of arousing in the mind of Mr.
Dinneford the deepest concern for the unhappy man. He saw the new peril
into which he was thrown by the loss of Andy, and made it his first
business to surround him with all possible good and strengthening
influences. So the old memories awakened by the coming of Andy did not
fade out and lose their power over the man. He had taken hold of the
good past again, and still held to it with the tight grasp of one
conscious of danger.

“We shall find the child--no fear of that,” Mr. Dinneford would say to
him over and over again, trying to comfort his own heart as well, as
the days went by and no little Andy could be found. “The police have the
girl under the sharpest surveillance, and she cannot baffle them much
longer.”

George Granger left the asylum with his friends, and dropped out
of sight. He did not show himself in the old places nor renew old
associations. He was too deeply hurt. The disaster had been too great
for any attempt on his part at repairing the old dwelling-places of his
life. His was not what we call a strong nature, but he was susceptible
of very deep impressions. He was fine and sensitive, rather than strong.
Rejected by his wife and family without a single interview with her or
even an opportunity to assert his innocence, he felt the wrong so deeply
that he could not get over it. His love for his wife had been profound
and tender, and when it became known to him that she had accepted the
appearances of guilt as conclusive, and broken with her own hands the
tie that bound them, it was more than he had strength to bear, and a
long time passed before he rallied from this hardest blow of all.

Edith knew that her father had seen Granger after securing his pardon,
and she had learned from him only, particulars of the interview. Beyond
this nothing came to her. She stilled her heart, aching with the
old love that crowded all its chambers, and tried to be patient and
submissive. It was very hard. But she was helpless. Sometimes, in the
anguish and wild agitation of soul that seized her, she would resolve
to put in a letter all she thought and felt, and have it conveyed to
Granger; but fear and womanly delicacy drove her back from this. What
hope had she that he would not reject her with hatred and scorn? It was
a venture she dared not make, for she felt that such a rejection would
kill her. But for her work among the destitute and the neglected, Edith
would have shut herself up at home. Christian charity drew her forth
daily, and in offices of kindness and mercy she found a peace and rest
to which she would otherwise have been stranger.

She was on her way home one afternoon from a visit to the mission-school
where she had first heard of the poor baby in Grubb's court. All that
day thoughts of little Andy kept crowding into her mind. She could not
push aside his image as she saw it on Christmas, when he sat among the
children, his large eyes resting in such a wistful look upon her face.
Her eyes often grew dim and her heart full as she looked upon that
tender face, pictured for her as distinctly as if photographed to
natural sight.

“Oh my baby, my baby!” came almost audibly from her lips, in a burst
of irrepressible feeling, for ever since she had seen this child, the
thought of him linked itself with that of her lost baby.

Up to this time her father had carefully concealed his interview
with Mrs. Bray. He was in so much doubt as to the effect that woman's
communication might produce while yet the child was missing that he
deemed it best to maintain the strictest silence until it could be
found.

Walking along with heart and thought where they dwelt for so large a
part of her time, Edith, in turning a corner, came upon a woman who
stopped at sight of her as if suddenly fastened to the ground--stopped
only for an instant, like one surprised by an unexpected and unwelcome
encounter, and then made a motion to pass on. But Edith, partly from
memory and partly from intuition, recognized her nurse, and catching
fast hold of her, said in a low imperative voice, while a look of wild
excitement spread over her face,

“Where is my baby?”

The woman tried to shake her off, but Edith held her with a grasp that
could not be broken.

“For Heaven's sake,” exclaimed the woman “let go of me! This is the
public street, and you'll have a crowd about us in a moment, and the
police with them.”

But Edith kept fast hold of her.

“First tell me where I can find my baby,” she answered.

“Come along,” said the woman, moving as she spoke in the direction Edith
was going when they met. “If you want a row with the police, I don't.”

Edith was close to her side, with her hand yet upon her and her voice in
her ears.

“My baby! Quick! Say! Where can I find my baby?”

“What do I know of your baby? You are a fool, or mad!” answered the
woman, trying to throw her off. “I don't know you.”

“But I know you, Mrs. Bray,” said Edith, speaking the name at a venture
as the one she remembered hearing the servant give to her mother.

At this the woman's whole manner changed, and Edith saw that she was
right--that this was, indeed, the accomplice of her mother.

“And now,” she added, in voice grown calm and resolute, “I do not mean
to let you escape until I get sure knowledge of my child. If you fly
from me, I will follow and call for the police. If you have any of
the instincts of a woman left, you will know that I am desperately
in earnest. What is a street excitement or a temporary arrest by the
police, or even a station-house exposure, to me, in comparison with the
recovery of my child? Where is he?”

“I do not know,” replied Mrs. Bray. “After seeing your father--”

“My father! When did you see him?” exclaimed Edith, betraying in her
surprised voice the fact that Mr. Dinneford had kept so far, even from
her, the secret of that brief interview to which she now referred.

“Oh, he hasn't told you! But it's no matter--he will do that in good
time. After seeing your father, I made an effort to get possession of
your child and restore him as I promised to do. But the woman who had
him hidden somewhere managed to keep out of my way until this morning.
And now she says he got off from her, climbed out of a second-story
window and disappeared, no one knows where.”

“This woman's name is Pinky Swett?” said Edith.

“Yes.”

Mrs. Bray felt the hand that was still upon her arm shake as if from a
violent chill.

“Do you believe what she says?--that the child has really escaped from
her?”

“Yes.”

“Where does she live?”

Mrs. Bray gave the true directions, and without hesitation.

“Is this child the one she stole from the Briar-street mission on
Christmas day?” asked Edith.

“He is,” answered Mrs. Bray.

“How shall I know he is mine? What proof is there that little Andy, as
he is called, and my baby are the same?”

“I know him to be your child, for I have never lost sight of him,”
 replied the woman, emphatically. “You may know him by his eyes and mouth
and chin, for they are yours. Nobody can mistake the likeness. But there
is another proof. When I nursed you, I saw on your arm, just above the
elbow, a small raised mark of a red color, and noticed a similar one on
the baby's arm. You will see it there whenever you find the child that
Pinky Swett stole from the mission-house on Christmas day. Good-bye!”

And the woman, seeing that her companion was off of her guard, sprang
away, and was out of sight in the crowd before Edith could rally herself
and make an attempt to follow. How she got home she could hardly tell.




CHAPTER XXVII.



_FOR_ weeks the search for Andy was kept up with unremitting vigilance,
but no word of him came to the anxious searchers. A few days after the
meeting with Mrs. Bray, the police report mentioned the arrest of both
Pinky Swett and Mrs. Bray, _alias_ Hoyt, _alias_ Jewett, charged with
stealing a diamond ring of considerable value from a jewelry store. They
were sent to prison, in default of bail, to await trial. Mr. Dinneford
immediately went to the prison and had an interview with the two women,
who could give him no information about Andy beyond what Mrs. Bray had
already communicated in her hurried talk with Edith. Pinky could get no
trace of him after he had escaped. Mr. Dinneford did not leave the two
women until he had drawn from them a minute and circumstantial account
of all they knew of Edith's child from the time it was cast adrift. When
he left them, he had no doubt as to its identity with Andy. There was no
missing link in the chain of evidence.

The new life that had opened to little Andy since the dreary night on
which, like a stray kitten, he had crept into Andrew Hall's miserable
hovel, had been very pleasant. To be loved and caressed was a strange
and sweet experience. Poor little heart! It fluttered in wild terror,
like a tiny bird in the talons of a hawk, when Pinky Swett swooped down
and struck her foul talons into the frightened child and bore him off.

“If you scream, I'll choke you to death!” she said, stooping to his ear,
as she hurried him from the mission-house. Scared into silence, Andy did
not cry out, and the arm that grasped and dragged him away was so strong
that he felt resistance to be hopeless. Passing from Briar street, Pinky
hurried on for a distance of a block, when she signaled a street-car.
As she lifted Andy upon the platform, she gave him another whispered
threat:

“Mind! if you cry, I'll kill you!”

There were but few persons in the car, and Pinky carried the child
to the upper end and sat him down with his face turned forward to the
window, so as to keep it as much out of observation as possible. He sat
motionless, stunned with surprise and fear. Pinky kept her eyes upon
him. His hands were laid across his breast and held against it tightly.
They had not gone far before Pinky saw great tear-drops falling upon the
little hands.

“Stop crying!” she whispered, close to his ear; “I won't have it! You're
not going to be killed.”

Andy tried to keep back the tears, but in spite of all he could do they
kept blinding his eyes and falling over his hands.

“What's the matter with your little boy?” asked a sympathetic, motherly
woman who had noticed the child's distress.

“Cross, that's all.” Pinky threw out the sentence in at snappish,
mind-your-own-business tone.

The motherly woman, who had leaned forward, a look of kindly interest on
her face, drew back, chilled by this repulse, but kept her eyes upon the
child, greatly to Pinky's annoyance. After riding for half a mile, Pinky
got out and took another car. Andy was passive. He had ceased crying,
and was endeavoring to get back some of the old spirit of brave
endurance. He was beginning to feel like one who had awakened from a
beautiful dream in which dear ideals had almost reached fruition, to
the painful facts of a hard and suffering life, and was gathering up
his patience and strength to meet them. He sat motionless by the side of
Pinky, with his eyes cast down, his chin on his breast and his lips shut
closely together.

Another ride of nearly half a mile, when Pinky left the car and struck
away from the common thoroughfare into a narrow alley, down which she
walked for a short distance, and then disappeared in one of the small
houses. No one happened to observe her entrance. Through a narrow
passage and stairway she reached a second-story room. Taking a key from
her pocket, she unlocked the door and went in. There was a fire in
a small stove, and the room was comfortable. Locking the door on the
inside she said to Andy, in a voice changed and kinder,

“My! your hands are as red as beets. Go up to the stove and warm
yourself.”

Andy obeyed, spreading out his little hands, and catching the grateful
warmth, every now and then looking up into Pinky's face, and trying with
a shrewder insight than is usually given to a child of his age to read
the character and purposes it half concealed and half made known.

“Now, Andy,” said Pinky, in a mild but very decided way--“your name's
Andy?”

“Yes, ma'am,” answered the child, fixing his large, intelligent eyes on
her face.

“Well, Andy, if you'll be a good and quiet boy, you needn't be afraid of
anything--you won't get hurt. But if you make a fuss, I'll throw you at
once right out of the window.”

Pinky frowned and looked so wicked as she uttered the last sentence that
Andy was frightened. It seemed as if a devouring beast glared at him out
of her eyes. She saw the effect of her threat, and was satisfied.

The short afternoon soon passed away. The girl did not leave the room,
nor talk with the child except in very low tones, so as not to attract
the attention of any one in the house. As the day waned snow began to
fall, and by the time night set in it was coming down thick and fast. As
soon as it was fairly dark, Pinky wrapped a shawl about Andy, pinning it
closely, so as to protect him from the cold, and quietly left the house.
He made no resistance. A car was taken, in which they rode for a long
distance, until they were on the outskirts of the city. The snow had
already fallen to a depth of two or three inches, and the storm was
increasing. When she left the car in that remote neighborhood, not a
person was to be seen on the street. Catching Andy into her arms, Pinky
ran with him for the distance of half a block, and then turned into a
close alley with small houses on each side. At the lower end she stopped
before one of these houses, and without knocking pushed open the door.

“Who's that?” cried a voice from an upper room, the stairway to which
led up from the room below.

“It's me. Come down, and be quiet,” answered Pinky, in a warning voice.

A woman, old and gray, with all the signs of a bad life on her wrinkled
face, came hastily down stairs and confronted Pinky.

“What now? What's brought you here?” she demanded, in no friendly tones.

“There, there, Mother Peter! smooth down your feathers. I've got
something for you to do, and it will pay,” answered Pinky, who had shut
the outside door and slipped the bolt.

At this, the manner of Mother Peter, as Pinky had called her, softened,
and she said,

“What's up? What deviltry are you after now, you huzzy?”

Without replying to this, Pinky began shaking the snow from Andy and
unwinding the shawl with which she had bound him up. After he was free
from his outside wrappings, she said, looking toward the woman,

“Now, isn't he a nice little chap? Did you ever see such eyes?”

The worn face of the woman softened as she turned toward the beautiful
child, but not with pity. To that feeling she had long been a stranger.

“I want you to keep him for a few days,” said Pinky, speaking in
the woman's ears. “I'll tell you more about it after he's in bed and
asleep.”

“He's to be kept shut up out of sight, mind,” was Pinky's injunction,
in the conference that followed. “Not a living soul in the neighborhood
must know he's in the house, for the police will be sharp after him.
I'll pay you five dollars a week, and put it down in advance. Give him
plenty to eat, and be as good to him as you can, for you see it's a fat
job, and I'll make it fatter for you if all comes out right.”

The woman was not slow to promise all that Pinky demanded. The house in
which she lived had three rooms, one below and two smaller ones above.
From the room below a stove-pipe went up through the floor into a
sheet-iron drum in the small back chamber, and kept it partially heated.
It was arranged that Andy should be made a close prisoner in this room,
and kept quiet by fear. It had only one window, looking out upon the
yard, and there was no shed or porch over the door leading into the yard
below upon which he could climb out and make his escape. In order to
have things wholly secure the two women, after Andy was asleep, pasted
paper over the panes of glass in the lower sash, so that no one could
see his face at the window, and fastened the sash down by putting a nail
into a gimlet-hole at the top.

“I guess thatt will fix him,” said Pinky, in a tone of satisfaction.
“All you've got to do now is to see that he doesn't make a noise.”

On the next morning Andy was awake by day-dawn. At first he did not know
where he was, but he kept very still, looking around the small room and
trying to make out what it all meant. Soon it came to him, and a vague
terror filled his heart. By his side lay the woman into whose hands
Pinky had given him. She was fast asleep, and her face, as he gazed in
fear upon it, was even more repulsive than it had looked on the night
before. His first impulse, after comprehending his situation, was to
escape if possible. Softly and silently he crept out of bed, and made
his way to the door. It was fastened. He drew the bolt back, when it
struck the guard with a sharp click. In an instant the old woman was
sitting up in bed and glaring at him.

“You imp of Satan!” she cried, springing after him with a singular
agility for one of her age, and catching him by the arm with a vice-like
grip that bruised the tender flesh and left it marked for weeks, drew
him back from the door and flung him upon the bed.

“Stay there till I tell you to get up,” she added, with a cruel threat
in her voice. “And mind you, there's to be no fooling with me.”

The frightened child crept under the bed-clothes, and hid his face
beneath them. Mother Peter did not lie down again, but commenced
dressing herself, muttering and grumbling as she did so.

“Keep where you are till I come back,” she said to Andy, with the same
cruel threat in her voice. Going out, she bolted the door on the other
side. It was nearly half an hour before the woman returned, bringing a
plate containing two or three slices of bread and butter and a cup of
milk.

“Now get up and dress yourself,” was her sharply-spoken salutation to
Andy as she came into the room. “And you're to be just as still as a
mouse, mind. There's your breakfast.” She set the plate on a table and
went out, bolting, as before, the door on the other side. Andy did not
see her again for over an hour. Left entirely alone in his prison,
his restless spirit chafed for freedom. He moved about the apartment,
examining everything it contained with the closest scrutiny, yet without
making any noise, for the woman's threat, accompanied as it had been
with such a wicked look, was not forgotten. He had seen in that look a
cruel spirit of which he was afraid. Two or three times he thought he
heard a step and a movement in the adjoining chamber, and waited, almost
holding his breath, with his eyes upon the door, expecting every moment
to see the scowling face of his jailer. But no hand touched the door.

Tired at last with everything in the room, he went to the window and
sought to look out, as he had already done many times. He could not
understand why this window, was so different from any he had ever seen,
and puzzled over it in his weak, childish way. As he moved from pane to
pane, trying to see through, he caught a glimpse of something outside,
but it was gone in a moment. He stepped back, then came up quickly to
the glass, all the dull quietude of manner leaving him. As he did so a
glimpse of the outside world came again, and now he saw a little hole in
the paper not larger than a pin's head. To scrape at this was a simple
instinct. In a moment he saw it enlarging, as the paper peeled off
from the glass. Scraping away with his finger-nail, the glass was soon
cleared of paper for the space of an inch in diameter, and through this
opening he stood gazing out upon the yards, below, and the houses that
came up to them from a neighboring street. There was a woman in one
of these yards, and she looked up toward the window where Andy stood,
curiously.

“You imp of Satan!” were the terrible words that fell upon his ears at
this juncture, and he felt himself caught up as by a vulture. He knew
the cruel voice and the grip of the cruel hands that had already left
their marks in his tender flesh. Mother Peter, her face red with passion
and her eyes slowing like coals of fire, held him high in the air,
and shook him with savage violence. She did not strike, but continued
shaking him until the sudden heat of her passion had a little cooled.

“Didn't I tell you not to meddle with anything in this room?” and with
another bruising grip of Andy's arms, she threw him roughly upon the
floor.

The little hole in the paper was then repaired by pasting another piece
of paper over it, after which Andy was left alone, but with a threat
from Mother Peter that if he touched the window again she would beat the
life out of him. She had no more trouble with him that day. Every half
hour or so she would come up stairs noiselessly, and listen at the door,
or break in upon the child suddenly and without warning. But she did not
find him again at the window. The restlessness at first exhibited had
died out, and he sat or lay upon the floor in a kind of dull, despairing
stupor. So that day passed.

On the second day of Andy's imprisonment he distinctly heard the old
woman go out at the street door and lock it after her. He listened for a
long time, but could hear no sound in the house. A feeling of relief and
a sense of safety came over him. He had not been so long in his prison
alone without the minutest examination of every part, and it had not
escaped his notice that the panes of glass in the upper sash of the
window were not covered with paper, as were those below. But for the
fear of one of Mother Peter's noiseless pouncings in upon him, he would
long since have climbed upon the sill and taken a look through the upper
sash. He waited now for full half an hour to be sure that his jailer had
left the house, and then, climbing to the window-sill with the agility
of a squirrel, held on to the edge of the lower sash and looked out
through the clear glass above. Dreary and unsightly as was all that lay
under his gaze, it was beautiful in the eyes of the child. His little
heart swelled and glowed; he longed, as a prisoner, for freedom. As he
stood there he saw that a nail held down the lower sash, which he had so
often tried, but in vain, to lift. Putting his finger on this nail, he
felt it move. It had been placed loosely in a gimlet-hole, and could
be drawn out easily. For a little while he stood there, taking out and
putting in the nail. While doing this he thought he heard a sound below,
and instantly dropped noiselessly from the window. He had scarcely done
so when the door of his room opened and Mother Peter came in. She looked
at him sharply, and then retired without speaking.

All the next day Andy listened after Mother Peter, waiting to hear her
go out. But she did not leave the house until after he was asleep in the
evening.

On the next day, after waiting until almost noon, the child's impatience
of confinement grew so strong that he could no longer defer his
meditated escape from the window, for ever since he had looked over the
sash and discovered how it was fastened down, his mind had been running
on this thing. He had noticed that Mother Peter's visits to his room
were made after about equal intervals of time, and that after she gave
him his dinner she did not come up stairs again for at least an hour.
This had been brought, and he was again alone.

For nearly five minutes after the woman went out, he sat by the untasted
food, his head bent toward the door, listening. Then he got up quietly,
climbed upon the window-sill and pulled the nail out. Dropping back upon
the floor noiselessly, he pushed his hands upward against the sash, and
it rose easily. Like an animal held in unwilling confinement, he did
not stop to think of any danger that might lie in the way of escape
when opportunity for escape offered. The fear behind was worse than any
imagined fear that could lie beyond. Pushing up the sash, Andy, without
looking down from the window, threw himself across the sill and dropped
his body over, supporting himself with his hands on the snow-encrusted
ledge for a moment, and then letting himself fall to the ground, a
distance of nearly ten feet. He felt his breath go as he swept through
the air, and lost his senses for an instant or two.

Stunned by the fall, he did not rise for several minutes. Then he got
up with a slow, heavy motion and looked about him anxiously. He was in
a yard from which there was no egress except by way of the house. It
was bitter cold, and he had on nothing but the clothing worn in the room
from which he had just escaped. His head was bare.

The dread of being found here by Mother Peter soon lifted him above
physical impediment or suffering. Through a hole in the fence he saw an
alley-way; and by the aid of an old barrel that stood in the yard, he
climbed to the top of the fence and let himself down on the other side,
falling a few feet. A sharp pain was felt in one of his ankles as his
feet touched the ground. He had sprained it in his leap from the window,
and now felt the first pangs attendant on the injury.

Limping along, he followed the narrow alley-way, and in a little while
came out upon a street some distance from the one in which Mother Peter
lived. There were very few people abroad, and no one noticed or spoke to
him as he went creeping along, every step sending a pain from the hurt
ankle to his heart. Faint with suffering and chilled to numbness, Andy
stumbled and fell as he tried, in crossing a street, to escape from a
sleigh that turned a corner suddenly. It was too late for the driver to
rein up his horse. One foot struck the child, throwing him out of the
track of the sleigh. He was insensible when taken up, bleeding and
apparently dead. A few people came out of the small houses in the
neighborhood, attracted by the accident, but no one knew the child or
offered to take him in.

There were two ladies in the sleigh, and both were greatly pained and
troubled. After a hurried consultation, one of them reached out her
hands for the child, and as she received and covered him with the
buffalo-robe said something to the driver, who turned his horse's head
and drove off at a rapid speed.




CHAPTER XXVIII.



_EVERY_ home for friendless children, every sin or poverty-blighted ward
and almost every hovel, garret and cellar where evil and squalor shrunk
from observation were searched for the missing child, but in vain. No
trace of him could be found. The agony of suspense into which Edith's
mind was brought was beginning to threaten her reason. It was only by
the strongest effort at self-compulsion that she could keep herself to
duty among the poor and suffering, and well for her it was that she did
not fail here; it was all that held her to safe mooring.

One day, as she was on her way home from some visit of mercy, a lady
who was passing in a carriage called to her from the window, at the same
time ordering her driver to stop. The carriage drew up to the sidewalk.

“Come, get in,” said the lady as she pushed open the carriage door. “I
was thinking of you this very moment, and want to have some talk about
our children's hospital. We must have you on our ladies' visiting
committee.”

Edith shook her head, saying, “It won't be possible, Mrs. Morton. I am
overtaxed now, and must lessen, instead of increasing, my work.”

“Never mind, about that now. Get in. I want to have some talk with you.”

Edith, who knew the lady intimately, stepped into the carriage and took
a seat by her side.

“I don't believe you have ever been to our hospital,” said the lady as
the carriage rolled on. “I'm going there now, and want to show you how
admirably everything is conducted, and what a blessing it is to poor
suffering children.”

“It hurts me so to witness suffering in little children,” returned
Edith, “that it seems as if I couldn't bear it much longer. I see so
much of it.”

“The pain is not felt as deeply when we are trying to relieve that
suffering,” answered her friend. “I have come away from the hospital
many times after spending an hour or two among the beds, reading and
talking to the children, with an inward peace in my soul too deep for
expression. I think that Christ draws very near to us while we are
trying to do the work that he did when he took upon himself our nature
in, the world and stood face to face visibly with men--nearer to us,
it may be, than at any other time; and in his presence there is
peace--peace that passeth understanding.”

They were silent for a little while, Edith not replying. “We have now,”
 resumed the lady, “nearly forty children under treatment--poor
little things who, but for this charity, would have no tender care or
intelligent ministration. Most of them would be lying in garrets or
miserable little rooms, dirty and neglected, disease eating out their
lives, and pain that medical skill now relieves, racking their poor worn
bodies. I sat by the bed of a little girl yesterday who has been in the
hospital over six months. She has hip disease. When she was brought here
from one of the vilest places in the city, taken away from a drunken
mother, she was the saddest-looking child I ever saw. Dirty, emaciated,
covered with vermin and pitiable to behold, I could hardly help crying
when I saw her brought in. Now, though still unable to leave her
bed, she has as bright and happy a face as you ever saw. The care and
tenderness received since she came to us have awakened a new life in her
soul, and she exhibits a sweetness of temper beautiful to see. After
I had read a little story for her yesterday, she put her arms about
my neck and kissed me, saying, in her frank, impulsive way, 'Oh, Mrs.
Morton, I do love you so!' I had a great reward. Never do I spend an
hour among these children without thanking God that he put it into the
hearts of a few men and women who could be touched with the sufferings
of children to establish and sustain so good an institution.”

The carriage stopped, and the driver swung open the door. They were
at the children's hospital. Entering a spacious hall, the two ladies
ascended to the second story, where the wards were located. There were
two of these on opposite sides of the hall, one for boys and one for
girls. Edith felt a heavy pressure on her bosom as they passed into the
girls' ward. She was coming into the presence of disease and pain, of
suffering and weariness, in the persons of little children.

There were twenty beds in the room. Everything was faultlessly clean,
and the air fresh and pure. On most of these beds lay, or sat up,
supported by pillows, sick or crippled children from two years of age
up to fifteen or sixteen, while a few were playing about the room. Edith
caught her breath and choked back a sob that came swiftly to her throat
as she stood a few steps within the door and read in a few quick glances
that passed from face to face the sorrowful records that pain had
written upon them.

“Oh, there's Mrs. Morton!” cried a glad voice, and Edith saw a girl who
was sitting up in one of the beds clap her hands joyfully.

“That's the little one I was telling you about,” said the lady, and she
crossed to the bed, Edith following. The child reached up her arms and
put them about Mrs. Morton's neck, kissing her as she did so.

It took Edith some time to adjust herself to the scene before her. Mrs.
Morton knew all the children, and had a word of cheer or sympathy for
most of them as she passed from bed to bed through the ward. Gradually
the first painful impressions wore off, and Edith felt herself drawn to
the little patients, and before five minutes had passed her heart was
full of a strong desire to do whatever lay in her power to help and
comfort them. After spending half an hour with the girls, during which
time Edith talked and read to a number of them, Mrs. Morton said,

“Now let us go into the boys' ward.”

They crossed the hall together, and entered the room on the other side.
Here, as in the opposite ward, Mrs. Morton was recognized as welcome
visitor. Every face that happened to be turned to the door brightened at
her entrance.

“There's a dear child in this ward,” said Mrs. Morton as they stood for
a moment in the door looking about the room. “He was picked up in the
street about a week ago, hurt by a passing vehicle, and brought here. We
have not been able to learn anything about him.”

Edith's heart gave a sudden leap, but she held it down with all the
self-control she could assume, trying to be calm.

“Where is he?” she asked, in a voice so altered from its natural tone
that Mrs. Morton turned and looked at her in surprise.

“Over in that corner,” she answered, pointing down the room.

Edith started forward, Mrs. Morton at her side.

“Here he is,” said the latter, pausing at a bed on which child with
fair face, blue eyes and golden hair was lying. A single glance sent the
blood back to Edith's heart. A faintness came over her; everything grew
dark. She sat down to keep from falling.

As quickly as possible and by another strong effort of will she rallied
herself.

“Yes,” she said, in a faint undertone in which was no apparent interest,
“he is a dear little fellow.”

As she spoke she laid her hand softly on the child's head, but not in a
way to bring any response. He looked at her curiously, and seemed half
afraid.

Meanwhile, a child occupying a bed only a few feet off had started up
quickly on seeing Edith, and now sat with his large brown eyes fixed
eagerly upon her, his lips apart and his hands extended. But Edith did
not notice him. Presently she got up from beside the bed and was turning
away when the other child, with a kind of despairing look in his face,
cried out,

“Lady, lady! oh, lady!”

The voice reached Edith's ears. She turned, and saw the face of Andy.
Swift as a flash she was upon him, gathering him in her arms and crying
out, in a wild passion of joy that could not be repressed,

“Oh, my baby! my baby! my boy! my boy! Bless God! thank God! oh, my
baby!”

Startled by this sudden outcry, the resident physician and two nurses
who were in the ward hurried down the room to see what it meant. Edith
had the child hugged tightly to her bosom, and resisted all their
efforts to remove him.

“My dear madam,” said the doctor, “you will do him some harm if you
don't take care.”

“Hurt my baby? Oh no, no!” she answered, relaxing her hold and gazing
down upon Andy as she let him fall away from her bosom. Then lifting her
eyes to the physician, her face so flooded with love and inexpressible
joy that it seemed like some heavenly transfiguration, she murmured, in
a low voice full of the deepest tenderness,

“Oh no. I will not do my baby any harm.”

“My dear, dear friend,” said Mrs. Morton, recovering from the shock of
her first surprise and fearing that Edith had suddenly lost her mind,
“you cannot mean what you say;” and she reached down for the child and
made a movement as if she were going to lift him away from her arms.

A look of angry resistance swept across Edith's pale face. There was a
flash of defiance in her eyes.

“No, no! You must not touch him,” she exclaimed; “I will die before
giving him up. My baby!”

And now, breaking down from her intense excitement, she bent over
the child again, weeping and sobbing. Waiting until this paroxysm had
expended itself, Mrs. Morton, who had not failed to notice that Andy
never turned his eyes for an instant away from Edith, nor resisted her
strained clasp or wild caresses, but lay passive against her with a look
of rest and peace in his face, said,

“How shall we know that he is your baby?”

At this Edith drew herself up, the light on her countenance fading
out. Then catching at the child's arm, she pulled the loose sleeve that
covered it above the elbow with hands that shook like aspens. Another
cry of joy broke from her as she saw a small red mark standing out clear
from the snowy skin. She kissed it over and over again, sobbing,

“My baby! Yes, thank God! my own long-lost baby!”

And still the child showed no excitement, but lay very quiet, looking at
Edith whenever he could see her countenance, the peace and rest on his
face as unchanging as if it were not really a living and mobile face,
but one cut into this expression by the hands of an artist.

“How shall you know?” asked Edith, now remembering the question of Mrs.
Morton. And she drew up her own sleeve and showed on one of her arms a
mark as clearly defined and bright as that on the child's arm.

No one sought to hinder Edith as she rose to her feet holding Andy,
after she had wrapped the bed-clothes about him.

“Come!” she spoke to her friend, and moved away with her precious
burden.

“You must go with us,” said Mrs. Morton to the physician.

They followed as Edith hurried down stairs, and entering the carriage
after her, were driven away from the hospital.




CHAPTER XXIX.



_ABOUT_ the same hour that Edith entered the boys' ward of the
children's hospital, Mr. Dinneford met Granger face to face in the
street. The latter tried to pass him, but Mr. Dinneford stopped, and
taking his almost reluctant hand, said, as he grasped it tightly,

“George Granger!” in a voice that had in it a kind of helpless cry.

The young man did not answer, but stood looking at him in a surprised,
uncertain way.

“George,” said Mr. Dinneford, his utterance broken, “we want you!”

“For what?” asked Granger, whose hand still lay in that of Mr.
Dinneford. He had tried to withdraw it at first, but now let it remain.

“To help us find your child.”

“My child! What of my child?”

“Your child and Edith's,” said Mr. Dinneford. “Come!” and he drew his
arm within that of Granger, the two men moving away together. “It has
been lost since the day of its birth--cast adrift through the same
malign influence that cursed your life and Edith's. We are on its track,
but baffled day by day. Oh, George, we want you, frightfully wronged as
you have been at our hands--not Edith's. Oh no, George! Edith's heart
has never turned from you for an instant, never doubted you, though in
her weakness and despair she was driven to sign that fatal application
for a divorce. If it were not for the fear of a scornful rejection, she
would be reaching out her hands to you now and begging for the old sweet
love, but such a rejection would kill her, and she dare not brave the
risk.”

Mr. Dinneford felt the young man's arm begin to tremble violently.

“We want you, George,” he pursued. “Edith's heart is calling out for
you, that she may lean it upon your heart, so that it break not in this
great trial and suspense. Your lost baby is calling for you out of some
garret or cellar or hovel where it lies concealed. Come, my son. The
gulf that lies between the dreadful past and the blessed future can be
leaped at a single bound if you choose to make it. We want you--Edith
and I and your baby want you.”

Mr. Dinneford, in his great excitement, was hurrying the young man along
at a rapid speed, holding on to his arm at the same time, as if afraid
he would pull it away and escape.

Granger made no response, but moved along passively, taking in every
word that was said. A great light seemed to break upon his soul, a great
mountain to be lifted off. He did not pause at the door from which,
when he last stood there, he had been so cruelly rejected, but went in,
almost holding his breath, bewildered, uncertain, but half realizing the
truth of what was transpiring, like one in a dream.

“Wait here,” said Mr. Dinneford, and he left him in the parlor and ran
up stairs to find Edith.

George Granger had scarcely time to recognize the objects around him,
when a carriage stopped at the door, and in a moment afterward the bell
rang violently.

The image that next met his eyes was that of Edith standing in the
parlor door with a child all bundled up in bed-clothing held closely in
her arms. Her face was trembling with excitement. He started forward on
seeing her with an impulse of love and joy that he could not restrain.
She saw him, and reading his soul in his eyes, moved to meet him.

“Oh, George, and you too!” she exclaimed. “My baby and my husband, all
at once! It is too much. I cannot bear if all!”

Granger caught her in his arms as she threw herself upon him and laid
the child against his breast.

“Yours and mine,” she sobbed. “Yours and mine, George!” and she put up
her face to his. Could he do less than cover it with kisses?

A few hours later, and a small group of very near friends witnessed a
different scene from this. Not another tragedy as might well be feared,
under the swift reactions that came upon Edith. No, no! She did not die
from a excess of joy, but was filled with new life and strength. Two
hands broken asunder so violently a few years ago were now clasped
again, and the minister of God as he laid them together pronounced in
trembling tones the marriage benediction.

This was the scene, and here we drop the curtain.








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAST ADRIFT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


