The Project Gutenberg eBook of A Forgotten Hero; Or, Not for Him
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A Forgotten Hero; Or, Not for Him

Author: Emily Sarah Holt

Illustrator: Horace Petherick


        
Release date: October 20, 2007 [eBook #23119]
                Most recently updated: April 26, 2010

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/23119

Credits: Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A FORGOTTEN HERO; OR, NOT FOR HIM ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




A Forgotten Hero, or, Not for Him, by Emily Sarah Holt.

________________________________________________________________________

This shortish book takes us to the end of the thirteenth century, and,
although the people in the book are mostly high-born, the scene is a
very domestic one.  It gives us a good understanding of the way life was
lived in those days.  Recommended for its social interest.
________________________________________________________________________

A FORGOTTEN HERO, OR, NOT FOR HIM, BY EMILY SARAH HOLT.



CHAPTER ONE.

CASTLES IN THE AIR.

  "O pale, pale face, so sweet and meek, Oriana!"

  Tennyson.

"Is the linen all put away, Clarice?"

"Ay, Dame."

"And the rosemary not forgotten?"

"I have laid it in the linen, Dame."

"And thy day's task of spinning is done?"

"All done, Dame."

"Good.  Then fetch thy sewing and come hither, and I will tell thee
somewhat touching the lady whom thou art to serve."

"I humbly thank your Honour."  And dropping a low courtesy, the girl
left the room, and returned in a minute with her work.

"Thou mayest sit down, Clarice."

Clarice, with another courtesy and a murmur of thanks, took her seat in
the recess of the window, where her mother was already sitting.  For
these two were mother and daughter; a middle-aged, comfortable-looking
mother, with a mixture of firmness and good-nature in her face; and a
daughter of some sixteen years, rather pale and slender, but active and
intelligent in her appearance.  Clarice's dark hair was smoothly brushed
and turned up in a curl all round her head, being cut sufficiently short
for that purpose.  Her dress was long and loose, made in what we call
the Princess style, with a long train, which she tucked under one arm
when she walked.  The upper sleeve was of a narrow bell shape, but under
it came down tight ones to the wrist, fastened by a row of large round
buttons quite up to the elbow.  A large apron--which Clarice called a
barm-cloth--protected the dress from stain.  A fillet of ribbon was
bound round her head, but she had no ornaments of any kind.  Her mother
wore a similar costume, excepting that in her case the fillet round the
head was exchanged for a wimple, which was a close hood, covering head
and neck, and leaving no part exposed but the face.  It was a very
comfortable article in cold weather, but an eminently unbecoming one.

These two ladies were the wife and daughter of Sir Gilbert Le Theyn, a
knight of Surrey, who held his manor of the Earl of Cornwall; and the
date of the day when they thus sat in the window was the 26th of March
1290.

It will strike modern readers as odd if I say that Clarice and her
mother knew very little of each other.  She was her father's heir, being
an only child; and it was, therefore, considered the more necessary that
she should not live at home.  It was usual at that time to send all
young girls of good family, not to school--there were no schools in
those days--but to be brought up under some lady of rank, where they
might receive a suitable education, and, on reaching the proper age,
have a husband provided for them, the one being just as much a matter of
course as the other.  The consent of the parents was asked to the
matrimonial selection of the mistress, but public opinion required some
very strong reason to justify them in withholding it.  The only
exception to this arrangement was when girls were destined for the
cloister, and in that case they received their education in a convent.
But there was one person who had absolutely no voice in the matter, and
that was the unfortunate girl in question.  The very idea of consulting
her on any point of it, would have struck a mediaeval mother with
astonishment and dismay.

Why ladies should have been considered competent in all instances to
educate anybody's daughters but their own is a mystery of the Middle
Ages.  Dame La Theyn had under her care three girls, who were receiving
their education at her hands, and she never thought of questioning her
own competency to impart it; yet, also without a question, she sent
Clarice away from her, first to a neighbouring knight's wife, and now to
a Princess, to receive the education which she might just as well have
had at home.  It was the command of Fashion; and who does not know that
Fashion, whether in the thirteenth century or the nineteenth, _must_ be
obeyed?

Clarice was on the brink of high promotion.  By means of a ladder of
several steps--a Dame requesting a Baroness, and the Baroness entreating
a Countess--the royal lady had been reached at last, whose husband was
the suzerain of Sir Gilbert.  It made little difference to this lady
whether her bower-women were two or ten, provided that the attendance
given her was as much as she required; and she readily granted the
petition that Clarice La Theyn might be numbered among those young
ladies.  The Earl of Cornwall was the richest man in England, not
excepting the King.  It may be added that, at this period, Earl was the
highest title known short of the Prince of Wales.  The first Duke had
not yet been created, while Marquis is a rank of much later date.

Dame La Theyn, though she had some good points, had also one grand
failing.  She was an inveterate gossip.  And it made no difference to
her who was her listener, provided a listener could be had.  A spicy
dish of scandal was her highest delight.  She had not the least wish nor
intention of doing harm to the person whom she thus discussed.  She had
not even the slightest notion that she did any.  But her bower-maidens
knew perfectly well that, if one of them wanted to put the dame in high
good-humour before extracting a favour, the best way to do so was to
inform her that Mrs Sheppey had had words with her goodman, or that
Dame Rouse considered Joan Stick i' th' Lane [Note 1], no better than
she should be.

An innocent request from Clarice, that she might know something about
her future mistress, had been to Dame La Theyn a delightful opportunity
for a good dish of gossip.  Reticence was not in the Dame's nature; and
in the thirteenth century--and much later than that--facts which in the
nineteenth would be left in concealment, or, at most, only delicately
hinted at, were spoken out in the plainest English, even to young girls.
The fancy that the Countess of Cornwall might not like her whole life,
so far as it was known, laid bare to her new bower-woman was one which
never troubled the mind of Dame La Theyn.  Privacy, to any person of
rank more especially, was an unknown thing in the Middle Ages.

"Thou must know, Clarice," began the Dame, "that of old time, before
thou wert born, I was bower-maiden unto my most dear-worthy Lady of
Lincoln--that is brother's wife to my gracious Lady of Gloucester,
mother unto my Lady of Cornwall, that shall be thy mistress.  The Lady
of Lincoln, that was mine, is a dame of most high degree, for her father
was my Lord of Saluces, [Note 2], in Italy--very nigh a king--and she
herself was wont to be called `Queen of Lincoln,' being of so high
degree.  Ah, she gave me many a good gown, for I was twelve years in her
service.  And a good woman she is, but rarely proud--as it is but like
such a princess should be.  I mind one super-tunic she gave me, but half
worn,"--this was said impressively, for a garment only _half worn_ was
considered a fit gift from one peeress to another--"of blue damask, all
set with silver buttons, and broidered with ladies' heads along the
border.  I gave it for a wedding gift unto Dame Rouse when she was wed,
and she hath it now, I warrant thee.  Well! her lord's sister, our Lady
Maud, was wed to my Lord of Gloucester; but stay!--there is a tale to
tell thee thereabout."

And Dame La Theyn bit off her thread with a complacent face.  Nothing
suited her better than a tale to tell, unless it were one to hear.

"Well-a-day, there be queer things in this world!"

The Dame paused, as if to give time for Clarice to note that very
original sentiment.

"Our Lady Maud was wed to her lord, the good Earl of Gloucester, with
but little liking of her side, and yet less on his.  Nathless, she made
no plaint, but submitted herself, as a good maid should do--for mark
thou, Clarice, 'tis the greatest shame that can come to a maiden to set
her will against those of her father and mother in wedlock.  A good
maid--as I trust thou art--should have no will in such matters but that
of those whom God hath set over her.  And all love-matches end ill,
Clarice; take my word for it!  Art noting me?"

Clarice meekly responded that the moral lesson had reached her.  She did
not add whether she meant to profit by it.  Probably she had her own
ideas on the question, and it is quite possible that they did not
entirely correspond with those which her mother was instilling.

"Now look on me, Clarice," pursued Dame La Theyn, earnestly.  "When I
was a young maid I had foolish fancies like other maidens.  Had I been
left to order mine own life, I warrant thee I should have wed with one
Master Pride, that was page to my good knight my father; and when I wist
that my said father had other thoughts for my disposal, I slept of a wet
pillow for many a night--ay, that did I.  But now that I be come to
years of discretion, I do ensure thee that I am right thankful my said
father was wiser than I.  For this Master Pride was slain at Evesham,
when I was of the age of five-and-twenty years, and left behind him not
so much as a mark of silver that should have come to me, his widow.  It
was a good twenty-fold better that I should have wedded with thy father,
Sir Gilbert, that hath this good house, and forty acres of land, and
spendeth thirty marks by the year and more.  Dost thou not see the
same?"

No.  Clarice heard, but she did not see.

"Well-a-day!  Now know, that when my good Lord of Gloucester, that wed
with our Lady Maud, was a young lad, being then in wardship unto Sir
Hubert, sometime Earl of Kent (whom God pardon!) he strake up a
love-match with the Lady Margaret, that was my said Lord of Kent his
daughter.  And in very deed a good match it should have been, had it
been well liked of them that were above them; but the Lord King that
then was--the father unto King Edward that now is--rarely misliked the
same, and gat them divorced in all hate.  It was not meet, as thou
mayest well guess, that such matters should be settled apart from his
royal pleasure.  And forthwith, ere further mischief could ensue, he
caused my said Lord of Gloucester to wed with our Lady Maud.  But look
thou, so obstinate was he, and so set of having his own way, that he
scarce ever said so much as `Good morrow' to the Lady Maud until he knew
that the said Lady Margaret was commanded to God.  Never do thou be
obstinate, Clarice.  'Tis ill enough for a young man, but yet worse for
a maid."

"How long time was that, Dame, an' it like you?"

"Far too long," answered Dame La Theyn, somewhat severely.  "Three years
and more."

Three years and more!  Clarice's thoughts went off on a long journey.
Three years of disappointed hope and passionate regret, three years of
weary waiting for death, on the part of the Lady Margaret!  Naturally
enough her sympathies were with the girl.  And three years, to Clarice,
at sixteen, seemed a small lifetime.

"Now, this lady whom thou shalt serve, Clarice," pursued her mother--and
Clarice's mind came back to the subject in hand--"she is first-born
daughter unto the said Sir Richard de Clare, Lord of Gloucester, and our
Lady Maud, of whom I spake.  Her name is Margaret, after the damsel that
died--a poor compliment, as methinks, to the said Lady Maud; and had I
been she, the maid should have been called aught else it liked my baron,
but not that."

Ah, but had I been he, thought Clarice, it should have been just that!

"And I have heard," said the Dame, biting off her thread, "that there
should of old time be some misliking--what I know not--betwixt the Lady
Margaret and her baron; but whether it were some olden love of his part
or of hers, or what so, I cast no doubt that she hath long ere this
overlived the same, and is now a good and loving lady unto him, as is
meet."

Clarice felt disposed to cast very much doubt on this suggestion.  She
held the old-fashioned idea that a true heart could love but once, and
could not forget.  Her vivid imagination instantly erected an exquisite
castle in the air, wherein the chief part was played by the Lady
Margaret's youthful lover--a highly imaginary individual, of the most
perfect manners and unparalleled beauty, whom the unfortunate maiden
could never forget, though she was forced by her cruel parents to marry
the Earl of Cornwall.  He, of course, was a monster of ugliness in
person, and of everything disagreeable in character, as a man in such
circumstances was bound to be.

Poor Clarice! she had not seen much of the world.  Her mental picture of
the lady whom she was to serve depicted her as sweet and sorrowful, with
a low plaintive voice and dark, starry, pathetic eyes, towards whom the
only feelings possible would be loving reverence and sympathy.

"And now, Clarice, I have another thing to say."

"At your pleasure, Dame."

"I think it but meet to tell thee a thing I have heard from thy father--
that the Lord Edmund, Earl of Cornwall, thy lady's baron, is one that
hath some queer ideas in his head.  I know not well what kind they are;
but folk say that he is a strange man and hath strange talk.  So do thou
mind what thou dost.  Alway be reverent to him, as is meet; but suffer
him not to talk to thee but in presence of thy lady."

Clarice felt rather frightened--all the more so from the extreme
vagueness of the warning.

"And now lap up thy sewing, child, for I see thy father coming in, and
we will go down to hall."

A few weeks later three horses stood ready saddled at the door of Sir
Gilbert's house.  One was laden with luggage; the second was mounted by
a manservant; and the third, provided with saddle and pillion, was for
Clarice and her father.  Sir Gilbert, fully armed, mounted his steed,
Clarice was helped up behind him, and with a final farewell to Dame La
Theyn, who stood in the doorway, they rode forth on their way to Oakham
Castle.  Three days' journey brought them to their destination, and they
were witnesses of a curious ceremony just as they reached the Castle
gate.  All over the gate horseshoes were nailed.  A train of visitors
were arriving at the Castle, and the trumpeter sounded his horn for
entrance.

"Who goes there?" demanded the warder.  "The right noble and puissant
Prince Edmund, Earl of Lancaster, Leicester, and Derby; and his most
noble lady, Blanche, Queen Dowager of Navarre, Countess of the same,
cousins unto my gracious Lord of Cornwall."

"Is this my said noble Lord's first visit unto the lordship of Oakham?"
asked the warder, without opening the gate.  "It is."

"Then our gracious Lord, as Lord of the said manor, demands of him one
of the shoes of the horse whereon he rides as tribute due from every
peer of the realm on his first coming to this lordship."

"My right noble and puissant Lord," returned the trumpeter, "denies the
said shoe of his horse; but offers in the stead one silver penny, for
the purchase of a shoe in lieu thereof."

"My gracious Lord deigns to receive the said silver penny in lieu of the
shoe, and lovingly prays your Lord and Lady to enter his said Castle."

Then the portcullis was drawn up, and the long train filed noisily into
the courtyard.  This ceremony was observed on the first visit of every
peer to Oakham Castle; but the visitor was allowed, if he chose, as in
this instance, to redeem the horse-shoe by the payment of money to buy
one.  The shoes contributed by eminent persons were not unfrequently
gilded.

The modest train of Sir Gilbert and Clarice crept quietly in at the end
of the royal suite.  As he was only a knight, his horse-shoe was not in
request Sir Gilbert told the warder in a few words his name and errand,
whereupon that functionary summoned a boy, and desired him to conduct
the knight and maiden to Mistress Underdone.  Having alighted from the
horse, Clarice shook down her riding-gown, and humbly followed Sir
Gilbert and the guide into the great hall, which was built like a
church, with centre and aisles, up a spiral staircase at one end of it,
and into a small room hung with green say [Note 3].  Here they had to
wait a while, for every one was too busily employed in the reception of
the royal guests to pay attention to such comparatively mean people.  At
last--when Sir Gilbert had yawned a dozen times, and strummed upon the
table about as many, a door at the back of the room was opened, and a
portly, comfortable-looking woman came forward to meet them.  Was this
the Countess? thought Clarice, with her heart fluttering.  It was
extremely unlike her ideal picture.

"Your servant, Sir Gilbert Le Theyn," said the newcomer, in a cheerful,
kindly voice.  "I am Agatha Underdone, Mistress of the Maids unto my
gracious Lady of Cornwall.  I bid thee welcome, Clarice--I think that is
thy name?"

Clarice acknowledged her name, with a private comforting conviction that
Mistress Underdone, at least, would be pleasant enough to live with.

"You will wish, without doubt, to go down to hall, where is good company
at this present," pursued the latter, addressing Sir Gilbert.  "So, if
it please you to take leave of the maiden--"

Sir Gilbert put two fingers on Clarice's head, as she immediately knelt
before him.  For a father to kiss a daughter was a rare thing at that
time, and for the daughter to offer it would have been thought quite
disrespectful, and much too familiar.

"Farewell, Clarice," said he.  "Be a good maid, be obedient and meek;
please thy lady; and may God keep thee, and send thee an husband in good
time."

There was nothing more necessary in Sir Gilbert's eyes.  Obedience was
the one virtue for Clarice to cultivate, and a husband (quality
immaterial) was sufficient reward for any amount of virtue.

Clarice saw her father depart without any feeling of regret.  He was
even a greater stranger to her than her mother.  She was a
self-contained, lonely-hearted girl, capable of intense love and
hero-worship, but never having come across one human being who had
attracted those qualities from their nest in her heart.

"Now follow me, Clarice," said Mistress Underdone, "and I will introduce
thee to the maidens, thy fellows, of whom there are four beside thee at
this time."

Clarice followed, silently, up a further spiral staircase, and into a
larger chamber, where four girls were sitting at work.

"Maidens," said Mistress Underdone, "this is your new fellow, Clarice La
Theyn, daughter of Sir Gilbert Le Theyn and Dame Maisenta La Heron.
Stand, each in turn, while I tell her your names."

The nearest of the four, a slight, delicate-looking, fair-haired girl,
rose at once, gathering her work on her arm.

"Olympias Trusbut, youngest daughter of Sir Robert Trusbut, of the
county of Lincoln, and Dame Joan Twentymark," announced Mistress
Underdone.

She turned to the next, a short, dark, merry-looking damsel.

"Elaine Criketot, daughter of Sir William Criketot and Dame Alice La
Gerunell, of the county of Chester."

The third was tall, stately, and sedate.

"Diana Quappelad, daughter of Sir Walter Quappelad and Dame Beatrice
Cotele, of the county of Rutland."

Lastly rose a quiet, gentle-looking girl.

"Roisia de Levinton, daughter of Sir Hubert de Levinton and Dame Maud
Ingham, of the county of Surrey."

Clarice's heart went faintly out to the girl from her own county, but
she was much too shy to utter a word.

Having introduced the girls to each other, Mistress Underdone left them
to get acquainted at their leisure.

"Art thou only just come?" asked Elaine, who was the first to speak.

"Only just come," repeated Clarice, timidly.

"Hast thou seen my Lady?"

"Not yet: I should like to see her."

Elaine's answer was a little half-suppressed laugh, which seemed the
concentration of amusement.

"Maids, hear you this?  Our new fellow has not seen the Lady.  She would
like to see her."

A smile was reflected on all four faces.  Clarice thought Diana's was
slightly satirical; those of the other two were rather pitying.

"Now, what dost thou expect her to be like?" pursued Elaine.

"I may be quite wrong," answered Clarice, in the shy way which she was
not one to lose quickly.  "I fancied she would be tall--"

"Right there," said Olympias.

"And dark--"

"Oh, no, she is fair."

"And very beautiful, with sorrowful eyes, and a low, mournful voice."

All the girls laughed, Roisia and Olympias gently, Diana scornfully,
Elaine with shrill hilarity.

"_Ha, jolife_!" cried the last-named young lady.  "Heard one ever the
like?  Only wait till supper.  Then thou shalt see this lovely lady,
with the sweet, sorrowful eyes and the soft, low voice.  _Pure foy_!  I
shall die with laughing, Clarice, if thou sayest anything more."

"Hush!" said Diana, sharply and suddenly; but Elaine's amusement had too
much impetus on it to be stopped all at once.  She was sitting with her
back to the door, her mirthful laughter ringing through the room, when
the door was suddenly flung open, and two ladies appeared behind it.
The startled, terrified expression on the faces of Olympias and Roisia
warned Clarice that something unpleasant was going to happen.  Had
Mistress Underdone a superior, between her and the Countess, whom to
offend was a very grave affair?  Clarice looked round with much interest
and some trepidation at the new comers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  Stykelane and Bakepuce--both most unpleasantly suggestive
names--occur on the Fines Roll for 1254.

Note 2.  Saluzzo.

Note 3.  A common coarse silk, used both for dress and upholstery.



CHAPTER TWO.

THE MISTS CLEAR AWAY.

  "Nec tecum possum vivere, nec sine te."

  Martial.

One at least of the ladies who had disturbed Elaine's hilarity did not
look a person of whom it was necessary to be afraid.  She was a matronly
woman of middle age, bearing the remains of extreme beauty.  She had a
good-natured expression, and she rather shrank back, as if she were
there on sufferance only.  But the other, who came forward into the
room, was tall, spare, upright, and angular, with a face which struck
Clarice as looking very like verjuice.

"Agatha!" called the latter, sharply; and, laying her hand, not gently,
on Elaine's shoulder, she gave her a shake which rapidly reduced her to
gravity.

"Ye weary, wretched giglots, what do ye thus laughing and tittering,
when I have distinctly forbidden the same?--Agatha!--Know ye not that
all ye be miserable sinners, and this lower world a vale of tears?--
Agatha!"

"Truly, Cousin Meg," observed the other lady, now coming forward,
"methinks you go far to make it such."

"Agatha might have more sense," returned her acetous companion.  "I have
bidden her forty times o'er to have these maids well ordered, and mine
house as like to an holy convent as might be compassed; and here is she
none knows whither--taking her pleasure, I reckon--and these caitiff
hildings making the very walls for to ring with their wicked foolish
laughter!--Agatha! bring me hither the rod.  I will see if a good
whipping bring not down your ill-beseen spirits, mistress!"

Elaine turned pale, and cast a beseeching glance at the pleasanter of
the ladies.

"Nay, now, Cousin Meg," interposed she, "I pray you, let not this my
first visit to Oakham be linked with trouble to these young maids.  I am
well assured you know grey heads cannot be well set on green shoulders."

"Lady, I am right unwilling to deny any bidding of yours.  But I do
desire of you to tell me if it be not enough to provoke a saint to
swear?"

"What! to hear a young maid laugh, cousin?  Nay, soothly, I would not
think so."

Mistress Underdone had entered the room, and, after dropping a courtesy
to each of the ladies, stood waiting the pleasure of her mistress.
Clarice was slowly coming to the conclusion, with dire dismay, that the
sharp-featured, sharp-tongued woman before her was no other than the
Lady Margaret of Cornwall, her lovely lady with the pathetic eyes.

"Give me the rod, Agatha," said the Countess, sternly.

"Nay, Cousin Meg, I pray you, let Agatha give it to me."

"_You'll_ not lay on!" said the Countess, with a contortion of her lips
which appeared to do duty for a smile.

"Trust me, I will do the right thing," replied Queen Blanche, taking the
rod which Mistress Underdone presented to her on the knee.  "Now.
Elaine, stand out here."

Elaine, very pale and preternaturally grave, placed herself in the
required position.

"Say after me.  `I entreat pardon of my Lady for being so unhappy as to
offend her.'"

Elaine faltered out the dictated words.

"Kiss the rod," said the Queen.

She was immediately obeyed.

"Now, Cousin Meg, for my sake, I pray you, let that suffice."

"Well, Lady, for _your_ sake," responded the Countess, with apparent
reluctance, looking rather like a kite from whose talons the Queen had
extracted a sparrow intended for its dinner.

"Sit you in this chamber, Cousin Meg?" asked the Queen, taking a curule
chair as she spoke--the only one in the room.

"Nay, Lady.  'Tis mine hour for repeating the seven penitential psalms.
I have no time to waste with these giglots."

"Then, I pray you, give me leave to abide here myself for a season."

"You will do your pleasure, Lady.  I only pray of you to keep them from
laughing and such like wickedness."

"Nay, for I will not promise that for myself," said Queen Blanche, with
a good-tempered smile.  "Go your ways, Meg; we will work no evil."

The Countess turned and stalked out of the door again.  And Clarice's
first castle in the air fell into pieces behind her.

"Now, Agatha, I pray thee shut the door," said the Queen, "that we
offend not my Cousin Margaret's ears in her psalms.  Fare ye all well,
my maids?  Thy face is strange to me, child."

Clarice courtesied very low.  "If it please the Lady Queen, I am but
just come hither."

She had to tell her name and sundry biographical particulars, and then,
suddenly looking round, the Queen said, "And where is Heliet?"

"Please it the Lady Queen, in my chamber," said Mistress Underdone.

"Bid her hither, good Agatha--if she can come."

"That can she, Lady."

Mistress Underdone left the room, and in another minute the regular tap
of approaching crutches was audible.  Clarice imagined their wearer to
be some old woman--perhaps the mother of Mistress Underdone.  But as
soon as the door was opened again, she was surprised and touched to
perceive that the sufferer who used them was a girl little older than
herself.  She came up to Queen Blanche, who welcomed her with a smile,
and held her hand to the girl's lips to be kissed.  This was her only
way of paying homage, for to her courtesying and kneeling were alike
impossible.

Clarice felt intuitively, as she looked into Heliet's face, that here
was a girl entirely different from the rest.  She seemed as if Nature
had intended her to be tall, but had stopped and stunted her when only
half grown.  Her shoulders were unnaturally high, and one leg was
considerably shorter than the other.  Her face was not in any way
beautiful, yet there was a certain mysterious attraction about it.
Something looked out of her eyes which Clarice studied without being
able to define, but which disposed her to keep on looking.  They were
dark, pathetic eyes, of the kind with which Clarice had gifted her very
imaginary Countess; but there was something beyond the pathos.

"It looks," thought Clarice, "as if she had gone through the pathos and
the suffering, and had come out on the other side--on the shore of the
Golden Land, where they see what everything meant, and are satisfied."

There was very little time for conversation before the supper-bell rang.
Queen Blanche made kind inquiries concerning Heliet's lameness and
general health, but had not reached any other subject when the sound of
the bell thrilled through the room.  The four girls rapidly folded up
their work, as though the summons were welcome.  Queen Blanche rose and
departed, with a kindly nod to all, and Heliet, turning to Clarice,
said, "Wilt thou come down with me?  I cannot go fast, as thou mayest
see; but thou wilt sit next to me, and I can tell thee anything thou
mayest wish to know."

Clarice thankfully assented, and they went down the spiral staircase
together into the great hall, where three tables were spread.  At the
highest and smallest, on the dais, were already seated the Queen and the
Countess, two gentlemen, and two priests.  At the head of the second
stood Mistress Underdone, next to whom was Diana, and Heliet led up
Clarice to her side.  They faced the dais, so that Clarice could watch
its distinguished occupants at her pleasure.  Tables for meals, at that
date, were simply boards placed on trestles, and removed when the repast
was over.  On the table at the dais was silver plate, then a rare
luxury, restricted to the highest classes, the articles being spoons,
knives, plates, and goblets.  There were no forks, for only one fork had
ever then been heard of as a thing to eat with, and this had been the
invention of the wife of a Doge of Venice, about two hundred years
previous, for which piece of refinement the public rewarded the lady by
considering her as proud as Lucifer.  Forks existed, both in the form of
spice-forks and fire-forks, but no one ever thought of eating with them
in England until they were introduced from Italy in the reign of James
the First, and for some time after that the use of them marked either a
traveller, or a luxurious, effeminate man.  Moreover, there were no
knives nor spoons provided for helping one's self from the dishes.  Each
person had a knife and spoon for himself, with which he helped himself
at his convenience.  People who were very delicate and particular wiped
their knives on a piece of bread before doing so, and licked their
spoons all over.  When these were the practices of fastidious people,
the proceedings of those who were not such may be discreetly left to
imagination.  The second table was served in a much more ordinary
manner.  In this instance the knife was iron and the spoon pewter, the
plate a wooden trencher (never changed), and the drinking-cup of horn.
In the midst of the table stood a pewter salt-cellar, formed like a
castle, and _very_ much larger than we use them now.

This salt-cellar acted as a barometer, not for weather, but for rank.
Every one of noble blood, or filling certain offices, sat above the
salt.

With respect to cooking our fathers had some peculiarities.  They ate
many things that we never touch, such as porpoises and herons, and they
used all manner of green things as vegetables.  They liked their bread
hot from the oven (to give cold bread, even for dinner, was a shabby
proceeding), and their meat much underdone, for they thought that
overdone meat stirred up anger.  They mixed most incongruous things
together; they loved very strong tastes, delighting in garlic and
verjuice; they never appear to have paid the slightest regard to their
digestion, and they were, in the most emphatic sense, not teetotallers.

The dining-hall, but not the table, was decorated with flowers, and
singers, often placed in a gallery at one end, were employed the whole
time.  A gentleman usher acted as butler, and a yeoman was always at
hand to keep out strange dogs, snuff candles, and light to bed the
guests, who were not always in a condition to find their way upstairs
without his help.  The hours at this time were nine or ten o'clock for
dinner (except on fast-days, when it was at noon), and three or four for
supper.  Two meals a day were thought sufficient for all men who were
not invalids.  The sick and women sometimes had a "rear-supper" at six
o'clock or later.  As to breakfast, it was a meal taken only by some
persons, and then served in the bedchamber or private boudoir at
convenience.  Wine, with bread sopped in it, was a favourite breakfast,
especially for the old.  Very delicate or exceptionally temperate people
took milk for breakfast; but though the Middle Ages present us with
examples of both vegetarians and total abstainers, yet of both there
were very few indeed, and they were mainly to be found among the
religious orders.

In watching the illustrious persons on the dais one thing struck Clarice
as extremely odd, which would never be thought strange in the nineteenth
century.  It was the custom in her day for husband and wife to sit
together at a meal, and, the highest ranks excepted, to eat from the
same plate.  But the Earl and Countess of Cornwall were on opposite
sides of the table, with one of the priests between them.  Clarice
thought they must have quarrelled, and softly demanded of Heliet if that
were the case.

"No, indeed," was Heliet's rather sorrowful answer.  "At least, not more
than usual.  The Lady of Cornwall will never sit beside her baron, and,
as thou shalt shortly see, she will not even speak to him."

"Not speak to him!" exclaimed Clarice.

"I never heard her do so yet," said Heliet.

"Does he entreat her very harshly?"

"There are few gentlemen more kindly or generous towards a wife.  Nay,
the harsh treatment is all on her side."

"What a miserable life to live!" commented Clarice.

"I fear he finds it so," said Heliet.

The dillegrout, or white soup, was now brought in, and Clarice, being
hungry, attended more to her supper than to her mistress for a time.
But during the next interval between the courses she studied her master.

He was a tall and rather fine-looking man, with a handsome face and a
gentle, pleasant expression.

There certainly was not in his exterior any cause for repulsion.  His
hair was light, his eyes bluish-grey.  He seemed--or Clarice thought so
at first--a silent man, who left conversation very much to others; but
the decidedly intelligent glances of the grey eyes, and an occasional
twinkle of fun in them when any amusing remark was made, showed that he
was not in the least devoid of brains.

Clarice thought that the priest who sat between the Earl and Countess
was a far more unprepossessing individual than his master.  He was a
Franciscan friar, in the robe of his order; while the friar who sat on
the other side of the Countess was a Dominican, and much more agreeable
to look at.

At this juncture the Earl of Lancaster, who bore a strong family
likeness to his cousin, the Earl of Cornwall--a likeness which extended
to character no less than person--inquired of the latter if any news had
been heard lately from France.

"I have had no letters lately," replied his host; and, turning to the
Countess, he asked, "Have you, Lady?"

Now, thought Clarice, she must speak to him.  Much to her surprise, the
Countess, imagining, apparently, that the Franciscan friar was her
questioner, answered, [Note 1], "None, holy Father."

The friar gravely turned his head and repeated the words to the Earl,
though he must have heard them.  And Clarice became aware all at once
that her own puzzled face was a source of excessive amusement to her
_vis-a-vis_, Elaine.  Her eyes inquired the reason.

"Oh, I know!" said Elaine, in a loud whisper across the table.  "I know
what perplexes thee.  They are all like that when they first come.  It
is such fun to watch them!"

And she did not succeed in repressing a convulsion behind her
handkerchief, even with the aid of Diana's "Elaine! do be sensible."

"Hush, my maid," said Mistress Underdone, gently.  "If the Lady see thee
laugh--"

"I shall be sent away without more supper, I know," said Elaine,
shrugging her shoulders.  "It is Clarice who ought to be punished, not
I.  I cannot help laughing when she looks so funny."

Elaine having succeeded in recovering her gravity without attracting the
notice of the Countess, Clarice devoured her helping of salt beef along
with much cogitation concerning her mistress's singular ways.  Still,
she could not restrain a supposition that the latter must have supposed
the priest to speak to her, when she heard the Earl say, "I hear from
Geoffrey Spenser, [Note 2], that our stock of salt ling is beyond what
is like to be wanted.  Methinks the villeins might have a cade or two
thereof, my Lady."

And again, turning to the friar, the Countess made answer, "It shall be
seen to, holy Father;" while the friar, with equal composure, as though
it were quite a matter of course, repeated to the Earl, "The Lady will
see to it, my Lord."

"Does she always answer him so?" demanded Clarice of Heliet, in an
astonished whisper.  "Always," replied Heliet, with a sad smile.  "But
surely," said Clarice, her amazement getting the better of her shyness,
"it must be very wanting in reverence from a dame to her baron!"

Clarice's ideas of wifely duty were of a very primitive kind.  Unbounded
reverence, unreasoning obedience, and diligent care for the husband's
comfort and pleasure were the main items.  As for love, in the sense in
which it is usually understood now, that was an item which simply might
come into the question, but it was not necessary by any means.  Parents,
at that time, kept it out of the matter as much as possible, and
regarded it as more of an encumbrance than anything else.

"It is a very sad tale, Clarice," answered Heliet, in a low tone.  "He
loves her, and would cherish her dearly if she would let him.  But there
is not any love in her.  When she was a young maid, almost a child, she
set her heart on being a nun, and I think she has never forgiven her
baron for being the innocent means of preventing her.  I scarcely know
which of them is the more to be pitied."

"Oh, he, surely!" exclaimed Clarice.

"Nay, I am not so sure.  God help those who are unloved! but, far more,
God help those who cannot love!  I think she deserves the more
compassion of the two."

"May be," answered Clarice, slowly--her thoughts were running so fast
that her words came with hesitation.  "But what shouldst thou say to one
that had outlived a sorrowful love, and now thought it a happy chance
that it had turned out contrary thereto?"

"It would depend upon how she had outlived it," responded Heliet,
gravely.

"I heard one say, not many days gone," remarked Clarice--not meaning to
let Heliet know from whom she had heard it--"that when she was young she
loved a squire of her father, which did let her from wedding with him;
and that now she was right thankful it so were, for he was killed on the
field, and left never a plack behind him, and she was far better off,
being now wed unto a gentleman of wealth and substance.  What shouldst
thou say to that?"

"If it were one of any kin to thee I would as lief say nothing to it,"
was Heliet's rather dry rejoinder.

"Nay, heed not that; I would fain know."

"Then I think the squire may have loved her, but so did she never him."

"In good sooth," said Clarice, "she told me she slept many a night on a
wet pillow."

"So have I seen a child that had broken his toy," replied Heliet,
smiling.

Clarice saw pretty plainly that Heliet thought such a state of things
was not love at all.

"But how else can love be outlived?" she said.

"Love cannot.  But sorrow may be."

"Some folks say love and sorrow be nigh the same."

"Nay, 'tis sin and sorrow that be nigh the same.  All selfishness is
sin, and very much of what men do commonly call love is but pure
selfishness."

"Well, I never loved none yet," remarked Clarice.

"God have mercy on thee!" answered Heliet.

"Wherefore?" demanded Clarice, in surprise.

"Because," said Heliet, softly, "`he that loveth not knoweth not God,
for God is charity.'"

"Art thou destined for the cloister?" asked Clarice.

Only priests, monks, and nuns, in her eyes, had any business to talk
religiously, or might reasonably be expected to do so.

"I am destined to fulfil that which is God's will for me," was Heliet's
simple reply.  "Whether that will be the cloister or no I have not yet
learned."

Clarice cogitated upon this reply while she ate stewed apples.

"Thou hast an odd name," she said, after a pause.

"What, Heliet?" asked its bearer, with a smile.  "It is taken from the
name of the holy prophet Elye, [Elijah] of old time."

"Is it?  But I mean the other."

"Ah, I love it not," said Heliet.

"No, it is very queer," replied Clarice, with an apologetic blush, "very
odd--Underdone!"

"Oh, but that is not my name," answered Heliet, quickly, with a little
laugh; "but it is quite as bad.  It is Pride."

Clarice fancied she had heard the name before, but she could not
remember where.

"But why is it bad?" said she.  "Then I reckon Mistress Underdone hath
been twice wed?"

"She hath," said Heliet, answering the last question first, as people
often do, "and my father was her first husband.  Why is pride evil?
Surely thou knowest that."

"Oh, I know it is one of the seven deadly sins, of course," responded
Clarice, quickly; "still it is very necessary and noble."

Heliet's smile expressed a mixture of feelings.  Clarice was not the
first person who has held one axiom theoretically, but has practically
behaved according to another.

"The Lord saith that He hates pride," said the lame girl, softly.  "How,
then, can it be necessary, not to say noble?"

"Oh, but--" Clarice went no further.

"But He did not mean what He said?"

"Oh, yes, of course!" said Clarice.  "But--"

"Better drop the _but_," said Heliet, quaintly.  "And Father Bevis is
about to say grace."

The Dominican friar rose and returned thanks for the repast, and the
company broke up, the Earl and Countess, with their guests, leaving the
hall by the upper door, while the household retired by the lower.

The preparations for sleep were almost as primitive as those for meals.
Exalted persons, such as the Earl and Countess, slept in handsome
bedsteads, of the tent form, hung with silk curtains, and spread with
coverlets of fur, silk, or tapestry.  They washed in silver basins, with
ewers of the same costly metal; and they sat, the highest rank in curule
chairs, the lower upon velvet-cove red forms or stools.  But ordinary
people, of whom Clarice was one, were not provided for in this luxurious
style.  Bower-maidens slept in pallet-beds, which were made extremely
low, so as to run easily under one of the larger bedsteads, and thus be
put out of the way.  All beds rejoiced in a quantity of pillows.  Our
ancestors made much more use of pillows and cushions than we--a fact
easily accounted for, considering that they had no softly-stuffed
chairs, but only upright ones of hard carved wood.  But Clarice's sheets
were simple "cloth of Rennes," while those of her mistress were set with
jewels.  Her mattress was stuffed with hay instead of wool; she had
neither curtains nor fly-nets, and her coverlet was of plain cloth,
unwrought by the needle.  In the matter of blankets they fared alike
except as to quality.  But in the bower-maidens' chamber, where all the
girls slept together, there were no basins of any material.  Early in
the morning a strong-armed maid came in, bearing a tub of water, which
she set down on one of the coffers of carved oak which stood at the foot
of each bed and held all the personal treasures of the sleeper.  Then,
by means of a mop which she brought with her, she gently sprinkled every
face with water, thus intimating that it was time to get up.  The tub
she left behind.  It was to provide--on the principle of "first come,
first served"--for the ablutions of all the five young ladies, though
each had her personal towel.  Virtue was thus its own reward, the
laziest girl being obliged to content herself with the dirtiest water.
It must, however, be remembered that she was a fastidious damsel who
washed more than face and hands.

They then dressed themselves, carefully tying their respective amulets
round their necks, without which proceeding they would have anticipated
all manner of ill luck to befall them during the day.  These articles
were small boxes of the nature of a locket, containing either a little
dust of one saint, a shred of the conventual habit of another, or a few
verses from a gospel, written very minutely, and folded up extremely
small.  Then each girl, as she was ready, knelt in the window, and
gabbled over in Latin, which she did not understand, a Paternoster, ten
Aves, and the Angelical Salutation, not unfrequently breaking eagerly
into the conversation almost before the last Amen had left her lips.
Prayers over, they passed into the sitting-room next door, where they
generally found a basket of manchet bread and biscuits, with a large jug
of ale or wine.  A gentleman usher called for Mistress Underdone and her
charges, and conducted them to mass in the chapel.  Here they usually
found the Earl and Countess before them, who alone, except the priests,
were accommodated with seats.  Each girl courtesied first to the altar,
then to the Countess, and lastly to the Earl, before she took her
allotted place.  The Earl always returned the salutation by a quiet
inclination of his head.  The Countess sat in stony dignity, and never
took any notice of it.  Needlework followed until dinner, after which
the Countess gave audience for an hour to any person desiring to see
her, and usually concluded it by a half-hour's nap.  Further needlework,
for such as were not summoned to active attendance on their mistress if
she went out, lasted until vespers, after which supper was served.
After supper was the recreation time, when in most houses the
bower-maidens enjoyed themselves with the gentlemen of the household in
games or dancing in the hall; but the Lady Margaret strictly forbade any
such frivolous doings in her maidens.  They were still confined to their
own sitting-room, except on some extraordinary occasion, and the only
amusements allowed them were low-toned conversation, chess, draughts, or
illumination.  Music, dancing (even by the girls alone), noisy games of
all kinds, and laughter, the Countess strictly forbade.  The practical
result was that the young ladies fell back upon gossip and
ghost-stories, until there were few nights in the year when Roisia would
have dared to go to bed by herself for a king's ransom.  An hour before
bed-time wine and cakes were served.  After this Mistress Underdone
recited the Rosary, the girls making the responses, and at eight
o'clock--a late hour at that time--they trooped off to bed.  All were
expected to be in bed and all lights out by half-past eight.  The
unlucky maiden who loitered or was accidentally hindered had to finish
her undressing in the dark.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  This strange habit of the Countess is a fact, and sorely
distressed the Earl, as he has himself put on record, though with all
his annoyance he shows himself quite conscious of the comicality of the
proceeding.

Note 2.  The _depenseur_, or family provider.  Hence comes the name of
Le Despenser, which, therefore, should not be spelt Despencer.



CHAPTER THREE.

ON THE THRESHOLD OF LIFE.

  "I will not dream of him handsome and strong--
  My ideal love may be weak and slight;
  It matters not to what class he belong,
  He would be noble enough in my sight;
  But he must be courteous toward the lowly,
  To the weak and sorrowful, loving too;
  He must be courageous, refined, and holy,
  By nature exalted, and firm, and true."

By the time that Clarice had been six weeks at Oakham she had pretty
well made up her mind as to the characters of her companions.  The
Countess did not belie the estimate formed on first seeing her.  The
gentle, mournful, loving woman of Clarice's dreams had vanished, never
to be recalled.  The girl came to count that a red-letter day on which
she did not see her mistress.  Towards the Earl her feeling was an odd
mixture of reverential liking and compassion.  He came far nearer the
ideal picture than his wife.  His manners were unusually gentle and
considerate of others, and he was specially remarkable for one trait
very rarely found in the Middle Ages--he was always thoughtful of those
beneath him.  Another peculiarity he had, not common in his time; he was
decidedly a humourist.  The comic side even of his own troubles was
always patent to him.  Yet he was a man of extremely sensitive feeling,
as well as of shrewd and delicate perceptions.  He lived a most
uncomfortable life, and he was quite aware of it.  The one person who
should have been his truest friend deliberately nursed baseless enmity
towards him.  The only one whom he loved in all the world hated him with
deadly hatred.  And there was no cause for it but one--the strongest
cause of all--the reason why Cain slew his brother.  He was of God, and
she was of the world.  Yet nothing could have persuaded her that he was
not on the high road to perdition, while she was a special favourite of
Heaven.

Clarice found Mistress Underdone much what she had expected--a
good-natured, sensible supervisor.  Her position, too, was not an easy
one.  She had to submit her sense to the orders of folly, and to sink
her good-nature in submission to harshness.  But she did her best,
steered as delicately as she could between her Scylla and Charybdis, and
always gave her girls the benefit of a doubt.

The girls themselves were equally distinct as to character.  Olympias
was delicate, with a failing of delicate people--a disposition to
complaining and fault-finding.  Elaine was full of fun, ready to barter
any advantage in the future for enjoyment in the present.  Diana was
caustic, proud of her high connections, which were a shade above those
of her companions, and inclined to be scornful towards everything not
immediately patent to her comprehension.  Roisia, while the most
amiable, was also the weakest in character of the four; she was easily
led astray by Elaine, easily persuaded to deviate from the right through
fear of Diana.

The two priests had also unfolded themselves.  The Dominican, Father
Bevis, awoke in Clarice a certain amount of liking, not unmixed with
rather timorous respect.  But he was a grave, silent, undemonstrative
man, who gave no encouragement to anything like personal affection,
though he was not harsh nor unkind.  The Franciscan, Father Miles, was
of a type common in his day.  The man and the priest were two different
characters.  Father Miles in the confessional was a stern master; Father
Miles at the supper-table was a jovial playfellow.  In his eyes,
religion was not the breath and salt of life, but something altogether
separate from it, and only to be mentioned on a Sunday.  It was a bundle
of ceremonies, not a living principle.  To Father Bevis, on the
contrary, religion was everything or nothing.  If it had anything to do
with a man at all, it must pervade his thoughts and his life.  It was
the leaven which leavened the whole lump; the salt whose absence left
all unsavoury and insipid; the breath, which virtually was identical
with life.  One mistake Father Bevis made, a very natural mistake to a
man who had been repressed, misunderstood; and disliked, as he had been
ever since he could remember--he did not realise sufficiently that
warmth was a necessity of life, and that young creatures more especially
required a certain brooding tenderness to develop their faculties.  No
one had ever given him love but God; and he was too apt to suppose that
religion could be fostered only in that way which had cherished his own.
His light burned bright to Godward, but it was not sufficiently visible
to men.

Clarice La Theyn had by this time discovered that there were other
people in the household beyond those already mentioned.  The Earl had
four squires of the body, and the Countess two pages in waiting, beside
a meaner crowd of dressers, sewers, porters, messengers, and all kinds
of officials.  The squires and the pages were the only ones who came
much in contact with the bower-maidens.

Both the pages were boys of about fifteen, of whom Osbert was quiet and
sedate for a boy, while Jordan was _espiegle_ and full of mischievous
tricks.  The squires demand longer notice.

Reginald de Echingham was the first to attract Clarice's notice--a fact
which, in Reginald's eyes, would only have been natural and proper.  He
was a handsome young man, and no one was better aware of it than
himself.  His principal virtue lay in a silky moustache, which he
perpetually caressed.  The Earl called him Narcissus, and he deserved
it.

Next came Fulk de Chaucombe, who was about as careless of his personal
appearance as Reginald was careful.  He looked on his brother squire
with ineffable disdain, as a man only fit to hunt out rhymes for
sonnets, and hold skeins of silk for ladies.  Call him a man! thought
Master Fulk, with supreme contempt.  Fulk's notion of manly occupations
centred in war, with an occasional tournament by way of dessert.

Third on the list was Vivian Barkworth.  To Clarice, at least, he was a
perplexity.  He was so chameleon-like that she could not make up her
mind about him.  He could be extremely attractive when he liked, and he
could be just as repellent.

Least frequently of any were her thoughts given to Ademar de Gernet.
She considered him at first entirely colourless.  He was not talkative;
he was neither handsome nor ugly; he showed no special characteristic
which would serve to label him.  She merely put him on one side, and
never thought of him unless she happened to see him.

Her fellow bower-maidens also had their ideas concerning these young
gentlemen.  Olympias was--or fancied herself--madly in love with the
handsome Reginald, on whom Elaine cracked jokes and played tricks, and
Diana exhausted all her satire.  As to Reginald, he was too deeply in
love with himself to be sensible of the attractions of any other person.
It struck Clarice as very odd when she found that the weak and gentle
Roisia was a timid admirer of the bear-like De Chaucombe.  As for Diana,
her shafts were levelled impartially at all; but in her inmost heart
Clarice fancied that she liked Vivian Barkeworth.  Elaine was
heart-whole, and plainly showed it.

The Countess had not improved on further acquaintance.  She was not only
a tyrant, but a capricious one.  Not merely was penalty sure to follow
on not pleasing her, but it was not easy to say what would please her at
any given moment.

"We might as well be in a nunnery!" exclaimed Diana.

"Nay," said Elaine, "for then we could not get out."

"Don't flatter thyself on getting out, pray," returned Diana.  "We shall
never get out except by marrying, or really going into a nunnery."

"For which I am sure I have no vocation," laughed Elaine.  "Oh, no!  I
shall marry; and won't I lead my baron a dance!"

"Who is it to be, Elaine?" asked Clarice.

"_Ha, chetife_!  How do I know?  The Lady will settle that.  I only hope
it won't be a man who puts oil on his hair and scents himself."

This remark was a side-thrust at Reginald, as Olympias well knew, and
she looked reproachfully at Elaine.

"Well, I hope it won't be one who kills half-a-dozen men every morning
before breakfast," said Diana, making a hit at Fulk.

It was Roisia's turn to look reproachful.  Clarice could not help
laughing.

"What dost thou think of our giddy speeches, Heliet?" said she.

Heliet looked up with her bright smile.

"Very like maidens' fancies," she said.  "For me, I am never like to
wed, so I can look on from the outside."

"But what manner of man shouldst thou fancy, Heliet?"

"Oh ay, do tell us!" cried more than one voice.

"I warrant he'll be a priest," said Elaine.

"He will have fair hair and soft manners," remarked Olympias.

"Nay, he shall have such hair as shall please God," said Heliet, more
gravely.  "But he must be gentle and loving, above all to the weak and
sorrowful: a true knight, to whom every woman is a holy thing, to be
guarded and tended with care.  He must put full affiance in God, and
love Him supremely: and next, me; and below that, all other.  He must
not fear danger, yet without fool-hardiness; but he must fear disgrace,
and fear and hate sin.  He must be true to himself, and must aim at
making of himself the best man that ever he can.  He must not be afraid
of ridicule, or of being thought odd.  He must have firm convictions,
and be ready to draw sword for them, without looking to see whether
other men be on the same side or not.  His heart must be open to all
misery, his brain to all true and innocent knowledge, his hand ready to
redress every wrong not done to himself.  For his enemies he must have
forgiveness; for his friends, unswerving constancy: for all men,
courtesy."

"And that is thy model man?  _Ha, jolife_!" cried Elaine.  "Why, I could
not stand a month of him."

"I am afraid he would be rather soft and flat," said Diana, with a curl
of her lip.

"No, I don't think that," answered Roisia.  "But I should like to know
where Heliet expects to find him."

"Do give his address, Heliet!" said Elaine, laughing.

"Ah!  I never knew but one that answered to that description," was
Heliet's reply.

"_Ha, jolife_!" cried Elaine, clapping her hands.  "Now for his name!  I
hope I know him--but I am sure I don't."

"You all know His name," said Heliet, gravely.  "How many of us know
_Him_?  For indeed, I know of no such man that ever lived, except only
Jesus Christ our Lord."

There was no answer.  A hush seemed to have fallen on the whole party,
which was at last broken by Olympias.

"Well, but--thou knowest we cannot have Him."

"Pardon me, I know no such thing," answered Heliet, in the same soft,
grave tone.  "Does not the Psalmist say, `_Portio mea, Domine_'?  [Note
1] And does not Solomon say, `_Dilectus meus mihi_?'  [Note 2.] Is it
not the very glory of His infinitude, that all who are His can have all
of Him?"

"Where did Heliet pick up these queer notions?" said Diana under her
breath.

"She goes to such extremes!"  Elaine whispered back.

"But all that means to go into the cloister," replied Olympias in a
discontented tone.

"Nay," said Heliet, taking up her crutches, "I hope a few will go to
Heaven who do not go into the cloister.  But we may rest assured of
this, that not one will go there who has not chosen Christ for his
portion."

"Well," said Diana, calmly, a minute after Heliet had disappeared, "I
suppose she means to be a nun!  But she might let that alone till she is
one."

"Let what alone?" asked Roisia.

"Oh, all that parson's talk," returned Diana.  "It is all very well for
priests and nuns, but secular people have nothing to do with it."

"I thought even secular people wanted to go to Heaven," coolly put in
Elaine, not because she cared a straw for the question, but because she
delighted in taking the opposite side to Diana.

"Let them go, then!" responded Diana, rather sharply.  "They can keep it
to themselves, can't they?"

"Well, I don't know," said Elaine, laughing.  "Some people cannot keep
things to themselves.  Just look at Olympias, whatever she is doing, how
she argues the whole thing out in public.  `Oh, shall I go or not?  Yes,
I think I will; no, I won't, though; yes, but I will; oh, can't somebody
tell me what to do?'"

Elaine's mimicry was so perfect that Olympias herself joined in the
laugh.  The last-named damsel carried on all her mental processes in
public, instead of presenting her neighbours, as most do, with results
only.  And when people wear their hearts upon their sleeves, the daws
will come and peck at them.

"Now, don't tease Olympias," said Roisia good-naturedly.

"Oh, let one have a bit of fun," said Elaine, "when one lives in a
convent of the strictest order."

"I suspect thou wouldst find a difference if thou wert to enter one,"
sneered Diana.

Elaine would most likely have fought out the question had not Mistress
Underdone entered at that moment with a plate of gingerbread in her hand
smoking hot from the oven.

"Oh, Mistress, I am so hungry!" plaintively observed that young lady.

Mistress Underdone laughed, and set down the plate.  "There, part the
spice-cake among you," said she.  "And when you be through, I have
somewhat to tell you."

"Tell us now," said Elaine, as well as a mouthful of gingerbread allowed
her to speak.

"Let me see, now--what day is this?" inquired Mistress Underdone.

All the voices answered her at once, "Saint Dunstan's Eve!"  [May 13th].

"So it is.  Well--come Saint Botolph, [June 17th] as I have but now
learned, we go to Whitehall."

"_Ha, jolife_!" cried Diana, Elaine, and Roisia at once.

"Will Heliet go too?" asked Clarice, softly.

"Oh, no; Heliet never leaves Oakham," responded Olympias.

Mistress Underdone looked kindly at Clarice.  "No, Heliet will not go,"
she said.  "She cannot ride, poor heart."  And the mother sighed, as if
she felt the prospective pain of separation.

"But there will be dozens of other maidens," said Elaine.  "There are
plenty of girls in the world beside Heliet."

Clarice was beginning to think there hardly were for her.

"Oh, thou dost not know what thou wilt see at Westminster!" exclaimed
Elaine.  "The Lord King, and the Lady Queen, and all the Court; and the
Abbey, with all its riches, and ever so many maids and gallants.  It is
delicious beyond description, when the Lady is away visiting some
shrine, and she does that nearly every day."

Roisia's "Hush!" had come too late.

"I pray you say that again, my mistress!" said the well-known voice of
the Lady Margaret in the doorway.  "Nay, I will have it.--Fetch me the
rod, Agatha.--Now then, minion, what saidst?  Thou caitiff giglot!  If I
had thee not in hand, that tongue of thine should bring thee to ruin.
What saidst, hussy?"

And Elaine had to repeat the unlucky words, with the birch in prospect,
and immediately afterwards in actuality.

"I will lock thee up when I go visiting shrines!" said the Countess with
her last stroke.  "Agatha, remember when we are at Westminster that I
have said so."

"Ay, Lady," observed Mistress Underdone, composedly.

And the Lady Margaret, throwing down the birch, stalked away, and left
the sobbing Elaine to resume her composure at her leisure.

In a vaulted upper chamber of the Palace of Westminster, on a bright
morning in June, four persons were seated.  Three, who were of the
nobler sex, were engaged in converse; the last, a lady, sat apart with
her embroidery in modest silence.  They were near relatives, for the men
were respectively husband, brother-in-law, and uncle of the woman, and
they were the most prominent members of the royal line of England, with
one who did not belong to it.

Foremost of the group was the King.  He was foremost in more senses than
one, for, as is well known, Edward the First, like Saul, was higher than
any of his people.  Moreover, he was as spare as he was tall, which made
him look almost gigantic.  His forehead was large and broad, his
features handsome and regular, but marred by that perpetual droop in his
left eyelid which he had inherited from his father.  Hair and
complexion, originally fair, had been bronzed by his Eastern campaigns
till the crisp curling hair was almost black, and the delicate tint had
acquired a swarthy hue.  He had a nose inclining to the Roman type, a
broad chest, agile arms, and excessively long legs.  His dark eyes were
soft when he was in a good temper, but fierce as a tiger's when roused
to anger; and His Majesty's temper was--well, not precisely angelic.
[Note 3.] It was like lightning, in being as sudden and fierce, but it
did not resemble that natural phenomenon in disappearing as quickly as
it had come.  On the contrary, Edward never forgot and hardly forgave an
injury.  His abilities were beyond question, and, for his time, he was
an unusually independent and original thinker.  His moral character,
however, was worse than is commonly supposed, though it did not descend
to the lowest depths it reached until after the death of his fair and
faithful Leonor.

The King's brother Edmund was that same Earl of Lancaster whom we have
already seen at Oakham.  He was a man of smaller intellectual calibre
than his royal brother, but of much pleasanter disposition.  Extreme
gentleness was his principal characteristic, as it has been that of all
our royal Edmunds, though in some instances it degenerated into
excessive weakness.  This was not the case with the Earl of Lancaster.
His great kindness of heart is abundantly attested by his own letters
and his brother's State papers.

William de Valence, Earl of Pembroke, was the third member of the group,
and he was the uncle of the royal brothers, being a son of their
grandmother's second marriage with Hugh de Lusignan, Count de La Marche.
Though he made a deep mark upon his time, yet his character is not easy
to fathom beyond two points--that his ability had in it a little element
of craft, and that he took reasonable care of Number One.

Over the head of the lady who sat in the curule chair, quietly
embroidering, twenty-five years had passed since she had been styled by
a poet, "the loveliest lady in all the land."  She was hardly less even
now, when her fifty years were nearly numbered; when, unseen by any
earthly eyes, her days were drawing to their close, and the angel of
death stood close beside her, ready to strike before six months should
be fulfilled.  Certainly, according to modern ideas of beauty, never was
a queen fairer than Leonor the Faithful, and very rarely has there been
one as fair.  And--more unusual still--she was as good as she was
beautiful.  The worst loss in all her husband's life was the loss of
her.

So far from seeing any sorrow looming in the future was King Edward at
this moment, that he was extremely jubilant over a project which he had
just brought to a successful issue.

"There!" said he, rubbing his hands in supreme satisfaction, "that
parchment settles the business.  When both my brother of Scotland and I
are gone, our children will reign over one empire, king and queen of
both.  Is not that worth living for?"

"_Soit_!"  [Be it so] ejaculated De Valence, shrugging his Provencal
shoulders.  "A few acres of bare moss and a handful of stags, to say
nothing of the barbarians who dwell up in those misty regions.  A fine
matter surely to clap one's hands over!"

"Ah, fair uncle, you never travelled in Scotland," interposed the gentle
Lancaster, before the King could blaze up, "and you know not what sort
of country it is.  From what I have heard, it would easily match your
land in respect of beauty."

"Match Poitou? or Provence?  Cousin, you must have taken leave of your
senses.  You were not born on the banks of the Isere, or you would not
chatter such treason as that."

"Truly no, fair Uncle, for I was born in the City of London, just
beyond," said Lancaster, with a good-humoured laugh; "and, verily, that
would rival neither Scotland nor Poitou, to say nothing of Dauphine and
Provence.  The goddess of beauty was not in attendance when I was born."

Perhaps few would have ventured on that assertion except himself.
Edmund of Lancaster was among the most handsome of our princes.

"Beshrew you both!" cried King Edward, unfraternally; "wherever will
these fellows ramble with their tongues?  Who said anything about
beauty?  I care not, I, if the maiden Margaret were the ugliest lass
that ever tied a kerchief, so long as she is the heiress of Scotland.
Ned has beauty enough and to spare; let him stare in the glass if he
cannot look at his wife."

The Queen looked up with an amused expression, and would, perhaps, have
spoken, had not the tapestry been lifted by some person unseen, and a
little boy of six years old bounded into the room.

No wonder that the fire in the King's eyes died into instant softness.
It would have been a wonder if the parents had not been proud of that
boy, for he was one of the loveliest children on whom human eye ever
rested.  Did it ever cross the minds of that father and mother that the
kindest deed they could have done to that darling child would have been
to smother him in his cradle?  Had the roll of his life been held up
before them at that moment, they would have counted only thirty-seven
years, written within and without in lamentation, and mourning, and woe.

King Edward lifted his little heir upon his knee.

"Look here, Ned," said he.  "Seest yonder parchment?"

The blue eyes opened a little, and the fair curls shook with a nod of
affirmation.

"What is it, thinkest?"

A shake of the pretty little head was the reply.

"Thy Cousin Margaret is coming to dwell with thee.  That parchment will
bring her."

"How old is she?" asked the Prince.

"But just a year younger than thou."

"Is she nice?"

The King laughed.  "How can I tell thee?  I never saw her."

"Will she play with us?"

"I should think she will.  She is just between thee and Beatrice."

"Beatrice is only a baby!" remarked the Prince disdainfully.  Six years
old is naturally scornful of four.

"Not more of a baby than thou," said his uncle Lancaster, playfully.

"But she's a girl, and I'm a man!" cried the insulted little Prince.

King Edward, excessively amused, set his boy down on the floor.  "There,
run to thy mother," said he.  "Thou wilt be a man one of these days, I
dare say; but not just yet, Master Ned."

And no angel voice whispered to one of them that it would have been well
for that child if he had never been a man, nor that ere he was six
months older, the mother, whose death was a worse calamity to him than
to any other, and the little Norwegian lassie to whom he was now
betrothed, would pass almost hand in hand into the silent land.  Three
months later, Margaret, Princess of Norway and Queen of Scotland, set
sail from her father's coast for her mother's kingdom, whence she was to
travel to England, and be brought up under the tender care of the royal
Leonor as its future queen.  But one of the sudden and terrible storms
of the North Sea met her ere she reached the shore of Scotland.  She
just lived to be flung ashore at Kirkwall, in the Orkneys, and there, in
the pitying hands of the fishers' wives, the child breathed out her
little life, having lived five years, and reigned for nearly as long.
Who of us, looking back to the probable lot that would have awaited her
in England, shall dare to pity that little child?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  "Thou art my portion, O Lord."--Psalm 119, verse 57.

Note 2.  "My beloved is mine."--Canticles 2, verse 16.

Note 3.  Two anecdotes may be given which illustrate this in a manner
almost comical; the first has been published more than once, the latter
has not to my knowledge.  When his youngest daughter Elizabeth was
married to the Earl of Hereford in 1302, the King, annoyed by some
unfortunate remark of the bride, snatched her coronet from her head and
threw it into the fire, nor did the Princess recover it undamaged.  In
1305, writing to John de Fonteyne, the physician of his second wife,
Marguerite of France, who was then ill of small-pox, the King warns him
not on any account to allow the Queen to exert herself until she has
completely recovered, "and if you do," adds the monarch in French, of
considerably more force than elegance, and not too suitable for exact
quotation, "you shall pay for it!"



CHAPTER FOUR.

WAITING AND WEARY.

  "Oh! for the strength of God's right hand! the way is hard and dreary,
  Through Him to walk and not to faint, to run and not be weary!"

  E.L. Marzials.

We left the Royal party in conversation in the chamber at Westminster.

"Have you quite resolved, Sire, to expel all the Jews from England?"
asked De Valence.

"Resolved?  Yes; I hope it is half done," replied the King.  "You are
aware, fair Uncle, that our Commons voted us a fifteenth on this
condition?"

"No, I did not hear that," said De Valence.

"How many are there of those creatures?" inquired Lancaster.

"How should I know?" returned Edward, with an oath.  "I only know that
the Chancellor said the houses and goods were selling well to our
profit."

"Fifteen thousand and sixty, my Lord of Surrey told me," said Lancaster.
"I doubted if it were not too high a computation; that is why I asked."

"Oh, very likely not," responded Edward, carelessly.  "There are as many
of them as gnats, and as much annoyance."

"Well, it is a pious deed, of course," said Lancaster, stroking his
moustache, not in the dilettante style of De Echingham, but like a man
lost in thought.  "It seems a pity, though, for the women and children."

"My cousin of Lancaster, I do believe, sings _Dirige_ over the chickens
in his barnyard," sneered De Valence.

Lancaster looked up with a good-tempered smile.

"Does my fair Uncle never wish for the day when the lion shall eat straw
like the ox?"  [Note 1.]

"Not I!" cried De Valence, with a hearty laugh.  "Why, what mean you?
are we to dine on a haunch of lion when it comes?"

"Nay, for that were to make us worse than either, methinks.  I suppose
we shall give over eating what has had life, at that time."

"_Merci, mille fois_!" laughed his uncle.  "My dinner will be spoiled.
Not thine, I dare say.  I'll be bound, Sire, our fair cousin will munch
his apples and pears with all the gusto in the world, and send his
squire to the stable to inquire if the lion has a straw doubled under
him."

"Bah!" said the King.  "What are you talking about?"

"How much will this business of the Jews cost your Grace?" asked De
Valence, dropping his sarcasms.

"Cost _me_?" demanded Edward, with a short laugh.  "Did our fair uncle
imagine we meant to execute such a project at our own expense?  Let the
rogues pay their own travelling fees."

"Ha! good!" said the Poitevin noble.  "And our fair cousin of Lancaster
shall chant the _De Profundis_ while they embark, and I will offer a
silver fibula to Saint Edward that they may all be drowned.  How sayest,
fair Cousin?"

"Nay," was Lancaster's answer, in a doubtful tone.  "I reckon we ought
not to pity them, being they that crucified our Lord.  But--"

But for all that, his heart cried out against his creed.  Yet it did not
occur to him that the particular men who were being driven from their
homes for no fault of theirs, and forced with keen irony of oppression
to pay their own expenses, were not those who crucified Christ, but were
removed from them by many generations.  The times of the Gentiles were
not yet fulfilled, and the cry, "His blood be on us, _and on our
children_" had not yet exhausted its awful power.

There was one person not present who would heartily have agreed with
Lancaster.  This was his cousin and namesake, Edmund, Earl of Cornwall,
who not only felt for the lower animals--a rare yet occasional state of
mind in the thirteenth century--but went further, and compassionated the
villeins--a sentiment which very few indeed would have dreamed of
sharing with him.  The labourers on the land were serfs, and had no
feelings,--that is, none that could be recognised by the upper classes.
They were liable to be sold with the land which they tilled; nor could
they leave their "hundred" without a passport.  Their sons might not be
educated to anything but agriculture; their daughters could not be
married without paying a fine to the master.  Worse things than these
are told of some, for of course the condition of the serf largely
depended on the disposition of his owner.

The journey from Oakham to Westminster was a pleasant change to all the
bower-maidens but one, and that was the one selected to travel with her
mistress in the litter.  Each was secretly, if not openly, hoping not to
be that one; and it was with no little trepidation that Clarice received
the news that this honour was to be conferred on her.  She discovered,
however, on the journey, that scolding was not the perpetual occupation
of the Countess.  She spent part of every day in telling her beads, part
in reading books woefully dry to the apprehension of Clarice, and part
in sleeping, which not unfrequently succeeded the beads.  Conversation
she never attempted, and Clarice, who dared not speak till she was
spoken to, began to entertain a fear of losing the use of her tongue.
Otherwise she was grave and quiet enough, poor girl! for she was not
naturally talkative.  She was very sorry to part with Heliet, and she
felt, almost without knowing why, some apprehension concerning the
future.  Sentiments of this sort were quite unknown to such girls as
Elaine, Diana, and Roisia, while with Olympias they arose solely from
delicate health.  But Clarice was made of finer porcelain, and she could
not help mournfully feeling that she had not a friend in the world.  Her
father and mother were not friends; they were strangers who might be
expected to do what they thought best for her, just as the authorities
of a workhouse might take conscientious care in the apprenticing of the
workhouse girls.  But no more could be expected, and Clarice felt it.
If there had only been, anywhere in the world, somebody who loved her!
There was no such probability to which it was safe to look forward.
Possibly, some twenty or thirty years hence, some of her children might
love her.  As for her husband, he was simply an embarrassing future
certainty, who--with almost equal certainty--would not care a straw
about her.  That was only to be expected.  The squire who liked Roisia
would be pretty sure to get Diana; while the girl who admired Reginald
de Echingham was safe to fall to Fulk de Chaucombe.  Things always were
arranged so in this world.  Perhaps, thought Clarice, those girls were
the happiest who did not care, who took life as it came, and made all
the fun they could out of it.  But she knew well that this was how life
and she would never take each other.

Whitehall was reached at last, on that eve of Saint Botolph.  Clarice
was excessively tired, and only able to judge of the noise without, and
the superb decorations and lofty rooms within.  Lofty, be it remembered,
to her eyes; they would not look so to ours.  She supped upon salt
merling [whiting], pease-cods [green peas], and stewed fruit, and was
not sorry to get to bed.

In the morning, she found the household considerably increased.  Her
eyes were almost dazzled by the comers and goers; and she really noticed
only one person.  Two young knights were among the new attendants of the
Earl, but one of them Clarice could not have distinguished from the
crowd.  The other had attracted her notice by coming forward to help the
Countess from her litter, and, instead of attending his mistress
further, had, rather to Clarice's surprise, turned to help _her_.  And
when she looked up to thank him, it struck her that his face was like
somebody she knew.  She did not discover who it was till Roisia
observed, while the girls were undressing, that--"My cousin is growing a
beard, I declare.  He had none the last time I saw him."

"Which is thy cousin?" asked Clarice.

"Why, Piers Ingham," said Roisia.  "He that helped my Lady from the
litter."

"Oh, is he thy cousin?" responded Clarice.

"By the mother's side," answered Roisia.  "He hath but been knighted
this last winter."

"Then he is just ready for a wife," said Elaine.  "I wonder which of us
it will be!  It is tolerably sure to be one.  I say, maids, I mean to
have a jolly time of it while we are here!  It shall go hard with me if
I do not get promoted to be one of the Queen's bower-women!"

"Oh, would I?" interpolated Diana.

"Why?" asked more than one voice.

"I am sure," said Olympias, "I had ever so much rather be under the Lady
Queen than our Lady."

"Oh, that may be," said Diana.  "I was not looking at it in that light.
There is some amusement in deceiving our Lady, and one doesn't feel it
wrong, because she is such a vixen; but there would be no fun in taking
in the Queen, she's too good."

"I wonder what Father Bevis would say to that doctrine," demurely
remarked Elaine.  "What it seems to mean is, that a lie is not such a
bad thing if you tell it to a bad person as it would be if you told it
to a good one.  Now I doubt if Father Bevis would be quite of that
opinion."

"Don't talk nonsense," was Diana's reply.

"Well, but is it nonsense?  Didst thou mean that?"

It was rather unusual for Elaine thus to satirise Diana, and looked as
if the two had changed characters, especially when Diana walked away,
muttering something which no one distinctly heard.

Elaine proved herself a tolerably true prophetess.  _Fete_ followed
_fete_.  Clarice found herself initiated into Court circles, and
discovered that she was enjoying herself very much.  But whether the
attraction lay in the pageants, in the dancing, in her own bright array,
or in the companionship, she did not pause to ask herself.  Perhaps if
she had paused, and made the inquiry, she might have discovered that
life had changed to her since she came to Westminster.  The things
eternal, of which Heliet alone had spoken to her, had faded away into
far distance; they had been left behind at Oakham.  The things temporal
were becoming everything.

In a stone balcony overhanging the Thames, at Whitehall, sat Earl Edmund
of Cornwall, in a thoughtful attitude, resting his head upon his hand.
He had been alone for half an hour, but now a tall man in a Dominican
habit, who was not Father Bevis, came round the corner of the balcony,
which ran all along that side of the house.  He was the Prior or Rector
of Ashridge, a collegiate community, founded by the Earl himself, of
which we shall hear more anon.

The Friar sat down on the stone bench near the Earl, who took no further
notice of him than by a look, his eyes returning to dreamy contemplation
of the river.

"Of what is my Lord thinking?" asked the Friar, gently.

"Of life," said the Prince.

"Not very hopefully, I imagine."

"The hope comes at the beginning, Father.  Look at yonder pleasure-boat,
with the lads and lasses in it, setting forth for a row.  There is hope
enough in their faces.  But when the journey comes near its end, and the
perilous bridge must be shot, and the night is setting in, what you see
in the faces then will not be hope.  It will be weariness; perhaps
disgust and sorrow.  And--in some voyages, the hope dies early."

"True--if it has reference only to the day."

"Ah," responded the Prince, with a smile which had more sadness than
mirth in it, "you mean to point me to the hope beyond.  But the day is
long Father.  The night has not come yet, and the bridge is still to be
shot.  Ay, and the wind and rain are cold, as one drops slowly down the
river."

"There is home at the end, nevertheless," answered the Dominican.  "When
we sit round the fire in the banquet hall, and all we love are round us,
and the doors shut safe, we shall easily forget the cold wind on the
water."

"When!  Yes.  But I am on the water yet, and it may be some hours before
my barge is moored at the garden steps.  And--it is always the same,
Father.  It does seem strange, when there is only one earthly thing for
which a man cares, that God should deny him that one thing.  Why rouse
the hope which is never to be fulfilled?  If the width of the world had
lain all our lives between me and my Lady, we should both have been
happier.  Why should God bring us together to spoil each other's lives?
For I dare say she is as little pleased with her lot as I with mine--
poor Magot!"

"Will my Lord allow me to alter the figure he has chosen?" said the
Predicant Friar.  "Look at your own barge moored down below.  If the
rope were to break, what would become of the barge?"

"It would drift down the river."

"And if there were in it a little child, alone, too young to have either
skill or strength to steer it, what would become of him when the barge
shot the bridge?"

"Poor soul!--destruction, without question."

"And what if my Lord be that little child, safe as yet in the barge
which the Master has tied fast to the shore?  The rope is his trouble.
What if it be his safety also?  He would like far better to go drifting
down, amusing himself with the strange sights while daylight lasted; but
when night came, and the bridge to be passed, how then?  Is it not
better to be safe moored, though there be no beauty or variety in the
scene?"

"Nay, Father, but is there no third way?  Might the bridge not be passed
in safety, and the child take his pleasure, and yet reach home well and
sound?"

"Some children," said the Predicant Friar, with a tender intonation.
"But not that child."

The Earl was silent.  The Prior softly repeated a text of Scripture.

"Endure chastisement.  As sons God dealeth with you; what son then is
he, whom the Father chasteneth not?"  [Hebrews 12, verse 7, Vulgate
version.]

A low, half-repressed sigh from his companion reminded the Prior that he
was touching a sore place.  One of the Prince's bitterest griefs was his
childlessness.  [He has told us so himself.] The Prior tacked about, and
came into deeper water.

"`Nor have we a High Priest who cannot sympathise with our infirmities,
for He was tempted in all things like us, except in sinning.'" [Hebrews
4, verse 15, Vulgate version.]

"If one could see!" said the Earl, almost in a whisper.

"It would be easier, without doubt.  Yet `blessed are they who see not,
and believe.'  God can see.  I would rather He saw and not I, than--if
such a thing were possible--that I saw and not He.  Whether is better,
my Lord, that the father see the danger and guard the child without his
knowing anything, or that the child see it too, and have all the pain
and apprehension consequent upon the seeing?  The blind has the
advantage, sometimes."

"Yet who would wish to be blind on that account?" answered the Earl,
quickly.

"No man could wish it, nor need he.  Only, the blind man may take the
comfort of it."

"But you have not answered one point, Father.  Why does God rouse
longings in our hearts which He never means to fulfil?"

"Does God rouse them?"

"Are they sin, then?"

"No," answered the Prior, slowly, as if he were thinking out the
question, and had barely reached the answer.  "I dare not say that.
They are nature.  Some, I know, would have all that is nature to be sin;
but I doubt if God treats it thus in His Word.  Still, I question if He
raises those longings.  He allows them.  Man raises them."

"Does He never guide them?"

"Yes, that I think He does."

"Then the question comes to the same thing.  Why does God not guide us
to long for the thing that He means to give us?"

"He very often does."

"Then," pursued the Earl, a little impatiently, "why does He not turn us
away from that which He does not intend us to have?"

"My Lord," said the Predicant, gravely, "from the day of his fall, man
has always been asking God _why_.  He will probably go on doing it to
the day of the dissolution of all things.  But I do not observe that God
has ever yet answered the question."

"It is wrong to ask it, then, I suppose," said the Earl, with a weary
sigh.

"It is not faith that wants to know why.  `He that believeth hasteneth
not.'  [Isaiah 28, verse 16, Vulgate version.] `What I do, thou knowest
not now; but thou shalt know hereafter.'  [John 13 verse 7.] We can
afford to wait, my Lord."

"Easily enough," replied the Earl, with feeling, "if we knew it would
come right in the end."

"It will come as He would have it who laid down His life that you should
live for ever.  Is that not enough for my Lord?"

Perhaps the Prince felt it enough.  At all events, he gave no answer.

"Well, that is not my notion of going comfortably through life!"
observed Miss Elaine Criketot, in a decided tone.  "My idea is to pull
all the plums out of the cake, and leave the hard crusts for those that
like them."

"Does anybody like them?" laughingly asked Clarice.

"Well, for those who need them, then.  Plenty of folks in this world are
glad of hard crusts or anything else."

"Thy metaphor is becoming rather confused," observed Diana.

"Dost thou not think, Elaine Criketot, that it might be only fair to
leave a few plums for those whose usual fare is crusts?  A crust now and
then would scarcely hurt the dainty damsels who commonly regale
themselves on plums."

It was a fourth voice which said this--a voice which nobody expected,
and the sound of which brought all the girls to their feet in an
instant.

"Most certainly, Lord Earl," replied Elaine, courtesying low; "but I
hope they would be somebody else's plums than mine."

"I see," said the Earl, with that sparkle of fun in his eyes, which they
all knew.  "Self-denial is a holy and virtuous quality, to be cultivated
by all men--except me.  Well, we might all subscribe that creed with
little sacrifice.  But then where would be the self-denial?"

"Please it the Lord Earl, it might be practised by those who liked it."

"I should be happy to hear of any one who liked self-denial," responded
the Earl, laughing.  "Is that not a contradiction in terms?"

Elaine was about to make a half-saucy answer, mixed sufficiently with
reverence to take away any appearance of offence, when a sight met her
eyes which struck her into silent horror.  In the doorway, looking a
shade more acetous than usual, stood Lady Margaret.  It was well known
to all the bower-maidens of the Countess of Cornwall that there were two
crimes on her code which were treated as capital offences.  Laughing was
the less, and being caught in conversation with a man was the greater.
But beneath both these depths was a deeper depth yet, and this was
talking to the Earl.  Never was a more perfect exemplification of the
dog in the manger than the Lady Margaret of Cornwall.  She did not want
the Earl for herself, but she was absolutely determined that no one else
should so much as speak to him.  Here was Elaine, caught red-handed in
the commission of all three of these stupendous crimes.  And if the
offence could be made worse, it was so by the Earl saying, as he walked
away, "I pray you, my Lady, visit not my sins on this young maid."

Had one compassionate sensation remained in the mind of the Countess
towards Elaine, that unlucky speech would have extinguished it at once.
She did not, as usual, condescend to answer her lord; but she turned to
Elaine, and in a voice of concentrated anger, demanded the repetition of
every word which had passed.  Diana gave it, for Elaine seemed almost
paralysed with terror.  Clarice, on the demand of her mistress,
confirmed Diana's report as exact.  The Countess turned back to Elaine.
Her words were scarcely to be reported, for she lost alike her temper
and her gentlewomanly manners.  "And out of my house thou goest this
day," was the conclusion, "thou shameful, giglot hussey!  And I will not
give thee an husband; thou shalt go back to thy father and thy mother,
with the best whipping that ever I gave maid.  And she that shall be in
thy stead shall be the ugliest maid I can find, and still of tongue, and
sober of behaviour.  Now, get thee gone!"

And calling for Agatha as she went, the irate lady stalked away.

Of no use was poor Elaine's flood of tears, nor the united entreaties of
her four companions.  Clarice and Diana soon found that they were not to
come off scatheless.  Neither had spoken to the Earl, as Elaine readily
confessed; but for the offence of listening to such treachery, both were
sent to bed by daylight, with bread and water for supper.  The offences
of grown-up girls in those days were punished like those of little
children now.  All took tearful farewells of poor Elaine, who dolefully
expressed her fear of another whipping when she reached home; and so she
passed out of their life.

It was several weeks before the new bower-maiden appeared.  Diana
suggested that the Countess found some difficulty in meeting with a girl
ugly enough to please her.  But, at last, one evening in November,
Mistress Underdone introduced the new-comer, in the person of a girl of
eighteen, or thereabouts, as Felicia de Fay, daughter of Sir Stephen de
Fay and Dame Sabina Watefeud, of the county of Sussex.  All the rest
looked with much curiosity at her.

Felicia, while not absolutely ugly, was undeniably plain.  Diana
remarked afterwards to Clarice that there were no ugly girls to be had,
as plainly appeared.  But the one thing about her which really was ugly
was her expression.  She looked no one in the face, while she diligently
studied every one who was not looking at her.  Let any one attempt to
meet her eyes, and they dropped in a moment.  Some do this from mere
bashfulness, but Felicia showed no bashfulness in any other way.
Clarice's feeling towards her was fear.

"I'm not afraid!" said Diana.  "I am sure I could be her match in fair
fight!"

"It is the fair fight I doubt," said Clarice.  "I am afraid there is
treachery in her eyes."

"She makes me creep all over," added Olympias.

"Well, she had better not try to measure swords with me," said Diana.
"I tell you, I have a presentiment that girl and I shall fight; but I
will come off victor; you see if I don't!"

Clarice made no answer, but in her heart she thought that Diana was too
honest to be any match for Felicia.

It was the Countess's custom to spend her afternoon, when the day was
fine, in visiting some shrine or abbey.  When the day was not fine, she
passed the time in embroidering among her maidens, and woe betide the
unlucky damsel who selected a wrong shade, or set in a false stitch.
The natural result of this was that the pine-cone, kept by Olympias as a
private barometer, was anxiously consulted on the least appearance of
clouds.  Diana asserted that she offered a wax candle to Saint Wulstan
every month for fair weather.  One of the young ladies always had to
accompany her mistress, and the fervent hope of each was to escape this
promotion.  Felicia alone never expressed this hope, never joined in any
tirades against the Countess, never got into disgrace with her, and
seemed to stand alone, like a drop of vinegar which would not mingle
with the oil around it.  She appeared to see everything, and say
nothing.  It was impossible to get at her likes and dislikes.  She took
everything exactly alike.  Either she had no prejudices, or she was all
prejudice, and nobody could tell which it was.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  Some readers will think such ideas too modern to have occurred
to any one in 1290.  There is evidence to the contrary.



CHAPTER FIVE.

BUILDING A FRESH CASTLE.

  "Oh, had I wist, afore I kissed,
  That loue had been sae ill to win,
  I'd locked my heart wi' a key o' gowd,
  And pinned it wi' a siller pin."--_Old Ballad_.

On an afternoon early in December, the Countess sat among her
bower-women at work.  Roisia was almost in tears, for she had just been
sharply chidden for choosing too pale a shade of blue.  A little stir at
the door made all look up, and they saw Father Bevis.  All rose to their
feet in an instant, the Countess dropping on her knees, and entreating
the priest's blessing.  He gave it, but as if his thoughts were far
away.

"Lady, my Lord hath sent me to you with tidings.  May God grant they be
not the worst tidings for England that we have heard for many a day!  A
messenger is come from the North, bringing news that the Lady Alianora
the Queen lieth dead in the marsh lands of Lincolnshire."

It was a worse loss to England than any there knew.  Yet they knew
enough to draw a cry of horror and sorrow from the lips of all those
that heard the news.  And a fortnight later, on the 17th of December,
they all stood at Charing Cross, to see the funeral procession wind down
from the north road, and set down the black bier for its last momentary
rest on the way to Westminster.

It is rather singular that the two items which alone the general reader
usually remembers of this good Queen's history should be two points
distinctly proved by research to be untrue.  Leonor did not suck the
poison from her husband's arm--a statement never made until a hundred
and fifty years after her death, and virtually disproved by the
testimony of an eye-witness who makes no allusion to it, but who tells
us instead that she behaved like a very weak woman instead of a very
brave one, giving way to hysterical screams, and so distressing the
sufferer that he bade four of his knights to carry her out of the room.
Again, Edward's affectionate regret did not cause the erection of the
famous Eleanor Crosses wherever the bier rested on its journey.  Leonor
herself desired their erection, and left money for it in her will.

The domestic peace of the royal house died with her who had stood at its
head for nineteen years.  To her son, above all others, her loss was
simply irreparable.  The father and son were men of very different
tastes and proclivities; and the former never understood the latter.  In
fact, Edward the Second was a man who did not belong to his century; and
such men always have a hard lot.  His love of quiet, and hatred of war,
were, in the eyes of his father, spiritless meanness; while his musical
tastes and his love of animals went beyond womanish weakness, and were
looked upon as absolute vices.  But perhaps to the nobles the worst
features of his character were two which, in the nineteenth century,
would entitle him to respect.  He was extremely faithful in friendship,
and he had a strong impatience of etiquette.  He loved to associate with
his people, to mix in their joys and sorrows, to be as one of them.  His
favourite amusement was to row down the Thames on a summer evening, with
music on board, and to chat freely with the lieges who came down in
their barges, occasionally, and much to his own amusement, buying
cabbages and other wares from them.  We should consider such actions
indicative of a kindly disposition and of simplicity of taste.  But in
the eyes of his contemporaries they were inexpressibly low.  And be it
remembered that it was not a question of associating with persons of
more or less education, whose mental standard might be unequal to his
own.  There was no mental standard whereby to measure any one in the
thirteenth century.  All (with a very few exceptions, and those chiefly
among the clergy) were uneducated alike.  The moral standard looked upon
war and politics as the only occupations meet for a prince, and upon
hunting and falconry as the only amusements sufficiently noble.  A man
who, like Edward, hated war, and had no fancy for either sport or
politics, was hardly a man in the eyes of a mediaeval noble.

The hardest treatment to which Edward was subjected, whether from his
father in youth or from his people at a later time, arose out of that
touching constancy which was his greatest virtue.  Perhaps he did not
always choose his friends well; he was inclined to put rather too much
trust in his fellow creatures; and Hugh Le Despenser the elder may have
been grasping and mean, and Piers Gavestone too extravagant.  Yet we
must remember that we read their characters only as depicted by the pens
of men who hated them--of men who were simply unable to conceive that
two persons might be drawn together by mutual taste for some elevated
and innocent pursuit.  The most wicked motives imaginable were
recklessly suggested for the attachment which Edward showed for these
chosen friends--who were not of noble origin, and had no handles to
their names till he conferred them.

It is only through a thick mist of ignorance and prejudice that we of
this day can see the character of Edward the Second.  We read it only in
the pages of monks who hated their Lollard King--in the angry complaints
of nobles who were jealous that he listened to and bestowed gifts on
other men than themselves.  But we do see some faint glimpses of the
Edward that really was, in the letter-book but recently dug out of a
mass of State papers; in the pages of De La Moor, [Note 1], the only
chronicler of his deeds who did not hate him, and who, as his personal
attendant, must have known more of him in a month than the monks could
have learned in a century; and last, not least, in that touching Latin
poem in which, during the sad captivity which preceded his sadder death,
he poured out his soul to God, the only Friend whom he had left in all
the universe.

  "Oh, who that heard how once they praised my name,
  Could think that from those tongues these slanders came?
  ...  I see Thy rod, and, Lord, I am content.
  Weave Thou my life until the web is spun;
  Chide me, O Father, till Thy will be done:
  Thy child no longer murmurs to obey;
  He only sorrows o'er the past delay.
  Lost is my realm; yet I shall not repine,
  If, after all, I win but that of Thine."

  [See Note 2.]

To a character such as this, the loss of his chief friend and only
reliable intercessor, when just emerging from infancy into boyhood, was
a loss for which nothing could atone.  It proved itself so in those
dreary after-years of perpetual misunderstandings and severities on the
part of his father, who set him no good example, and yet looked on the
son whose tastes were purer than his own as an instance of irredeemable
depravity.  The easiest thing in the world to do is one against which
God has denounced a woe--to put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter.

Another item of sorrowful news reached London with the coffin of Queen
Leonor.  It was the death of the baby Queen of Scotland, by whose
betrothal to Prince Edward the King had vainly hoped to fuse the
northern and southern kingdoms into one.  It left Scotland in a
condition of utter distraction, with no less than eleven different
claimants for the Crown, setting up claims good, bad, and indifferent;
but every one of them persuaded that all the others had not an inch of
ground to stand on, and that he was the sole true and rightful
inheritor.

The only claimants who really had a shadow of right may be reduced to
three.  If the old primitive custom of Scotland was to be regarded--a
custom dear to all Celtic nations--by which illegitimate children were
considered to have an equal right to the succession with the legitimate
ones, then there could be no question that the heir was Patrick de
Galithlys, son of Henry, the natural son of Alexander the Second.  But
if not--and in this respect undoubtedly the custom had become obsolete--
the struggle rested between John Baliol and Robert Bruce, of whom the
first was the son of Dervorgoyl, daughter of Margaret, eldest daughter
of David Earl of Huntingdon, brother of King William the Lion; while the
latter was the son of Isabel, the second daughter of David.  Every
reader knows that the question was submitted by consent of the Scottish
nobles to Edward the First as arbitrator, and that he gave his decision
in favour of Baliol.  In other words, he gave it against the existing
law both of England and Scotland, which did not recognise
representation, and according to which the son of the second sister
ought to have been preferred to the grandson of the elder.

The anxiety of our kings to bring in this law of representation is a
curious psychological fact.  Richard the First tried to do it by will,
in leaving the crown to his nephew Arthur; but the law was too strong
for him, and the rightful heir succeeded--his brother John.  Edward the
First contrived to abrogate the law, so far as Scotland was concerned, a
hundred years later.  And eighty years after him Edward the Third tried
again to alter the English law of succession, and this time the
experiment succeeded.  But its success was due mainly to two reasons--
the personal popularity of the dead Prince whose son was thus lifted
into the line of succession, while the rightful heir was extremely
unpopular; and the fact that the disinherited heir gave full consent and
assistance to the change in the law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The knights and squires of the Earl of Cornwall's household were
gathered together on the balcony which faced the river.  One only was
absent, Piers Ingham, who was occupied in a more interesting manner, as
will presently be seen.  His colleague, Sir Lambert Aylmer, was holding
forth in a lively manner for the benefit of the four squires, who were
listening to him with various degrees of attention.  Reginald de
Echingham could never spare much of that quality from his admirable
self, and De Chaucombe was an original thinker, who did not purchase
ready-made ideas from other people.  Barkeworth invariably agreed with
the last speaker in public, but kept his private views an inscrutable
mystery; while all that could be said of Gernet's notions was that he
had "_un grand talent pour le silence_."

To this quartette Sir Lambert was explaining his forecast of the
political weather.  The young knight had a great fancy for airing his
politics, and an unwavering conviction of the infallibility of his
judgment.  If Sir Lambert was to be believed, what King Edward would
undoubtedly do was to foment civil war in Scotland, until all the rival
male claimants had destroyed each other.  He would then marry the
daughter of one of them, and annex Scotland as her appanage.  All being
smooth in that quarter, the King would next undertake a pilgrimage to
Palestine, drive the Saracens out, and confer that country on one of his
sons-in-law.  He would then carry fire and sword through Borussia,
Lithuania, and other heathen kingdoms in the north, subdue them all, put
a few more sons-in-law in possession as tributary governors, and being
by that time an old man, would then return to Westminster to end his
days in peace, a new Alexander, and to leave a magnificent empire to his
son.

"Easier said than done," growled De Chaucombe, in his beard.

"Charming!" observed De Echingham, caressing his pet moustache.

"A lovely prospect, indeed," said De Barkeworth, with a bow, in a tone
so impartially suspended between conviction and cynicism that nobody
could tell which had dictated it.  "I should like to win my spurs in
Lithuania."

"Win thy spurs!" muttered De Chaucombe again.  "There are no spurs for
carpet-knights [Note 3] in the wardrobe of the Future."

"I think knights should have golden spurs, not gilt ones--don't you?"
inquired De Echingham.

"Puppy!" sneered De Chaucombe.  "If ever either are on thy heels it will
be a blunder of somebody's making."

"Is it necessary to quarrel?" asked Gernet, speaking for the first time.

"Oh, I trust I have more generosity than to quarrel with _him_," rather
contemptuously returned De Echingham, who, as every one present knew,
had as little physical courage as any girl.

"Make thyself easy," was the answer of De Chaucombe, as he walked away.
"I should not think of running the risk."

"What risk?" demanded Barkeworth, laughing.  De Chaucombe looked back
over his shoulder, and discharged a Parthian dart.

"The risk of turning my good Damascus blade on a toad," said he, to the
great amusement of Barkeworth.

De Chaucombe went to the end of the balcony, descended the steps which
led to the ground floor, and came on a second terrace, also fronting the
river.  As he turned a corner of the house he suddenly confronted two
people, who were walking slowly along the terrace, and conversing in
hushed tones.  Sir Piers Ingham was evidently and deeply interested, his
head slightly bowed towards Clarice who was as earnestly engaged in the
dissection of one of the _few_ leaves which Christmas had left
fluttering on the garden bushes.  As De Chaucombe approached she looked
up with a startled air, and blushed to her eyes.

De Chaucombe muttered something indistinct which might pass for "Good
evening," and resumed his path rather more rapidly than before.

"So the wind blows from that direction!" he said to himself.  "Well, it
does not matter a straw to me.  But what our amiable mistress will say
to the fair Clarice, when she comes to know of it, is another question.
I do believe that, if she had made up her mind to a match between them,
she would undo it again, if she thought they wished it.  It would be
just like her."

It had never occurred to Clarice to suppose that she did anything wrong
in thus disobeying point blank the known orders of her mistress that the
bower-maidens were to hold no intercourse whatever with the gentlemen of
the household.  She knew perfectly well that if the Countess saw her
talking to Sir Piers, she would be exceedingly angry; and she knew that
her parents fully intended and expected her to obey her mistress as she
would themselves.  Poor Clarice's code of morals looked upon discovery,
not disobedience, as the thing to be dreaded; and while she would have
recoiled with horror from the thought of unfaithfulness to her beloved,
she looked with absolute complacency on the idea of disloyalty to the
mistress whom she by no means loved.  How could she do otherwise when
she had never been taught better?

Clarice's standard was _loyaute d'amour_.  It is the natural standard of
all men, the only difference being in the king whom they set up.  A vast
number are loyal to themselves only, for it is themselves whom alone
they love.  Fewer are loyal to some human being; and poor humanity being
a very fallible thing, they often make sad shipwreck.  Very few indeed--
in comparison of the mass--are loyal to the King who claims and has a
right to their hearts' best affections.  And Clarice was not one of
these.

Inside the house the Countess and Mistress Underdone were very busy
indeed.  Before them, spread over forms and screens, lay piles of
material for clothing--linen, serge, silk, and crape, of many colours.
On a leaf-table at the side of the room a number of gold and silver
ornaments were displayed.  Furs were heaped upon the bed, boots and
loose slippers stood in a row in one corner; while Mistress Underdone
was turning over for her mistress's inspection a quantity of embroidered
neckerchiefs.

"Now, let me see," said the Countess, peremptorily.  "Measure off linen
for four gowns, Agatha--two of brown and two of red.  Serge for two--the
dark green.  One silk will be enough, and one of crape."

"How many ells the gown does my Lady choose to allow?" asked Mistress
Underdone, taking an ell-wand from the table.

"Four," said the Countess, curtly.  This was rather miserly measure,
four ells and a third being the usual reckoning; but Mistress Underdone
measured and cut in silence.

"Thou mayest allow a third more for the silk and crape," said the
Countess, in a fit of unusual generosity.

Mistress Underdone finished her measuring, laying each piece of material
neatly folded on the last, until the table held a tall heap of them.

"Now for hoods," pursued the Countess.  "Black cloth for two, lined with
cats' fur; russet for two more.  Capes for outdoor wear--two of the
green serge; one of black cloth lined with cats' fur; one of silk.  Four
linen wimples; two pairs of cloth boots, two of slippers; two corsets;
three of those broidered kerchiefs, one better than the others; four
pairs of hosen.  Measure off also twenty-four ells of linen cloth."

"Of what price, if it please my Lady?"

"Fivepence the ell.  And the boots of sixpence a pair.  What did that
green serge cost?"

"Threepence the ell, my Lady."

"That is monstrous.  Have I no cheaper?  Twopence would be good enough
for her."

"If it please my Lady, there is only that coarse grey serge at three
halfpence the ell, which was bought for the cook-maids."

"Humph!  I suppose that would scarcely do," said the Countess, in a tone
which sounded as if she wished it would.  "Well, then--those ornaments.
She must have a silver fibula, I suppose; and a copper-gilt one for
common.  What made thee put out all those other things?  That is enough
for her.  If she wants a silver chain, her husband must give it her; I
shall not.  As to rings and necklaces, they are all nonsense--not fit
for such as she."

"Would my Lady think proper to allow a dovecote with silver pins?"

The dovecote was a head-dress, a kind of round caul of gold or silver
network, secured by gold or silver pins fastened in the hair.

"Not I.  Let her husband give her such fooleries."

"And may I request to know what my Lady allows for making the garments?"

"Three halfpence each."

"Might I be pardoned if I remind my Lady that the usual price is
twopence each?"

"For me, perhaps; not for her."

Mistress Underdone went on measuring the linen in silence.

"There, that finishes for Clarice," said the Countess.  "Now for Diana.
She may have a silver chain in addition, two of the best kerchiefs,
and--no, that is enough.  Otherwise let her have just the same."

"If my Lady would graciously indulge her servant with permission to ask
it, do the maidens know yet what is to befall them?"

"No.  I shall tell them on Sunday.  Time enough."

And the Countess left Mistress Underdone to finish the work by herself.

"On Sunday!  Only two days beforehand!" said Agatha Underdone to
herself.  "Diana will stand it.  She is one that would not care much for
anything of that kind, and she will rule the house.  But Clarice!  If
she should have given her heart elsewhere!--and I have fancied, lately,
that she has given it somewhere.  That poor child!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

"But how can we?" queried Clarice.  "If I were to speak to the Lady--
even if I dared--I doubt--"

"I do not doubt, sweetheart," replied Sir Piers.  "No, the path must be
rather mere winding than that, though I confess I hate tortuous paths.
Father Miles is the only person who has any influence with the Lady, and
Father Bevis is the only one who has any with him."

"But Father Bevis would have no sympathy with a love-story."

"I am not sure that he would.  But my Lord will, I know; and Father
Bevis will listen to him.  Leave this business to me, my fair Clarice.
If I can obtain my Lord's ear this evening after vespers, and I think I
can, we shall soon have matters in train; and I have a fine hawk for
Father Miles, which will put him in a good humour.  Now, farewell, for I
hear the Lady's voice within."

The lovers parted hastily, and Clarice went in to attire herself for
mass.  For any one of her maidens to be absent from that ceremony would
have been a terrible offence in the eyes of the Countess; nor would any
less excuse than serious illness have availed to avert her displeasure.
Dinner followed mass, and a visit to the shrine of Saint Edward,
concluded by vespers, occupied the remainder of the afternoon.  There
was half an hour to spare before supper, and the girls were chatting
together in their usual "bower," or boudoir, when, to their surprise,
the Countess entered.

"I have ado but with two of you," she said, as she seated herself.

Naturally, the girls supposed that some penalty was about to befall
those two.  How had they offended her? and which of them were the
offenders?  To displease the Countess, as they all knew, was so
extremely easy, that not one of them was prepared for the next sentence.

"Two of you are to be wed on Tuesday."

This was a bombshell.  And it was the more serious because they were
aware that from this sentence there was no appeal.  Troubled eyes, set
in white faces, hurriedly sought each other.

Was it from sheer thoughtlessness, or from absolute malice, or even from
a momentary feeling of compassion towards the two who were to be
sacrificed, that the Countess made a long pause after each sentence?

"Diana Quappelad," she said.

Olympias, Roisia, and Clarice drew a sigh of relief.  There were just
half the chances against each that there had been.  Diana stood forward,
with a slight flush, but apparently not much concerned.

"Thou art to wed with Master Fulk de Chaucombe, and thy bridegroom will
be knighted on the wedding-day.  I shall give thee thy gear and thy
wedding-feast.  Mistress Underdone will show thee the gear."

The first momentary expression of Diana's face had been disappointment.
It passed in an instant, and one succeeded which was divided between
pleasurable excitement and amusement.  She courtesied very low, and
thanked the Countess, as of course was expected of her.

Roisia stood behind, with blank face and clasped hands.  There might be
further pain in store, but pleasure for her there could now be none.
The Countess quite understood the dumb show, but she made no sign.

"Clarice La Theyn."

The girl stood out, listening for the next words as though her life hung
on them.

"I shall also give thee thy gear, and thy squire will be knighted on the
wedding-day."

The Countess was turning away as though she had said all.  Clarice had
heard enough to make her feel as if life were not worth having.  A
squire who still required knighthood was not Piers Ingham.  Did it
matter who else it was?  But she found, the next moment, that it might.

"Would my Lady suffer me to let Clarice know whom she is to wed?" gently
suggested Mistress Underdone.

"Oh, did I not mention it?" carelessly responded the Countess, turning
back to Clarice.  "Vivian Barkeworth."

She paused an instant for the courtesy and thanks which she expected.
But she got a good deal more than she expected.  With a passionate sob
that came from her very heart, Clarice fell at the feet of the Lady
Margaret.

"What is all this fuss about?" exclaimed her displeased mistress.  "I
never heard such ado about nothing."

Her displeasure, usually feared above all things, was nothing to Clarice
in that terrible instant.  She sobbed forth that she loved elsewhere--
she was already troth-plight.

"Nonsense!" said the Countess, sharply.  "What business hadst thou with
such foolery, unknown to me?  All maidens are wed by orders from their
superiors.  Why shouldst thou be an exception?"

"Oh, have you no compassion?" cried poor Clarice, in her agony.  "Lady,
did you never love?"

All present were intently watching the face of the Countess, in the hope
of seeing some sign of relenting.  But when this question was asked, the
stern lips grew more set and stern than ever, and something like fire
flashed out of the usually cold blue-grey eyes.

"Who--I?" she exclaimed.  "Thanks be to all the saints right verily,
nay.  I never had ado with any such disgraceful folly.  From mine
earliest years I have ever desired to be an holy sister, and never to
see a man's face.  Get up, girl; it is of no use to kneel to me.  There
was no kindness shown to me; my wishes were never considered; why should
thine be?  I was made to array myself for my bridal, to the very
uprooting and destruction of all that I most loved and desired.  Ah! if
my Lord and father had lived, it would not have been so; he always
encouraged my vocation.  He said love was unhappy, and I thought it was
scandalous.  No, Clarice; I have no compassion upon lovers.  There never
ought to be any such thing.  Let it be as I have said."

And away stalked the Countess, looking more grey, square, and angular
than ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  De La Moor is the only chronicler in whose pages it is possible
to recognise the Edward of the letter-book, in which all his letters are
copied for the thirty-third year of his father's reign--1304-5.

Note 2.  Barnes's Edward the Third.  I must in honesty confess that I
have taken the liberty of smoothing Dr Barnes's somewhat rugged
translation.

Note 3.  A carpet-knight was one whose heroism lay more in rhetorical
visions addressed to his partner in the intervals of dancing than in
hard blows given and taken in the field.



CHAPTER SIX.

DESTROYED BY THE HURRICANE.

  "Our plans may be disjointed,
  But we may calmly rest:
  What God has once appointed
  Is better than our best."--Frances Ridley Havergal.

The Countess left Clarice prostrate on the ground, sobbing as if her
heart would break--Olympias feebly trying to raise and soothe her,
Roisia looking half-stunned, and Felicia palpably amused by the scene.

"Thou hadst better get up, child," said Diana, in a tone divided between
constraint and pity.  "It will do thee no good to lie there.  We shall
all have to put up with the same thing in our turn.  I haven't got the
man I should have chosen; but I suppose it won't matter a hundred years
hence."

"I am not so sure of that," said Roisia, in a low voice.

"Oh, thou art disappointed, I know," said Diana.  "I would hand Fulk
over to thee with pleasure, if I could.  I don't want him.  But I
suppose he will do as well as another, and I shall take care to be
mistress.  It is something to be married--to anybody."

"It is everything to be married to the right man," said Roisia; "but it
is something very awful to be married to the wrong one."

"Oh, one soon gets over that," was Diana's answer.  "So long as you can
have your own way, I don't see that anything signifies much.  I shall
not admire myself in my wedding-dress any the less because my squire is
not exactly the one I hoped it might be."

"Diana, I don't understand thee," responded Roisia.  "What does it
matter, I should say, having thine own way in little nothings so long as
thou art not to have it in the one thing for which thou really carest?
Thou dost not mean to say that a velvet gown would console thee for
breaking thy heart?"

"But I do," said Diana.  "I must be a countess before I could wear
velvet; and I would marry any man in the world who would make me a
countess."

Mistress Underdone, who had lifted up Clarice, and was holding her in
her arms, petting her into calmness as she would a baby, now thought fit
to interpose.

"My maids," she said, "there are women who have lost their hearts, and
there are women who were born without any.  The former case has the more
suffering, yet methinks the latter is really the more pitiable."

"Well, I think those people pitiable enough who let their hearts break
their sleep and interfere with their appetites," replied Diana.  "I have
got over my disappointment already; and Clarice will be a simpleton if
she do not."

"I expect Clarice and I will be simpletons," said Roisia, quietly.

"Please yourselves, and I will please myself," answered Diana.  "Now,
mistress, Clarice seems to have given over crying for a few seconds; may
we see the gear?"

"Oh, I want Father Bevis!" sobbed Clarice, with a fresh gush of tears.

"Ay, my dove, thou wilt be the better of shriving," said Mistress
Underdone, tenderly.  "Sit thee down a moment, and I will see to Father
Bevis.  Wait awhile, Diana."

It was not many minutes before she came back with Father Bevis, who took
Clarice into his oratory; and as it was a long while before she rejoined
them, the others--Roisia excepted--had almost time to forget the scene
they had witnessed, in the interest of turning over Diana's _trousseau_,
and watching her try on hoods and mantles.

The interview with Father Bevis was unsatisfactory to Clarice.  She
wanted comfort, and he gave her none.  Advice he was ready with in
plenty; but comfort he could not give her, because he could not see why
she wanted it.  He was simply incapable of understanding her.  He was
very kind, and very anxious to comfort her, if he could only have told
how to do it.  But love--spiritual love excepted--was a stranger to his
bosom.  No one had ever loved him; he could not remember his parents; he
had never had brother nor sister; and he had never made a friend.  His
heart was there, but it had never been warmed to life.  Perhaps he came
nearest to loving the Earl his master; but even this feeling awakened
very faint pulsations.  His capacity for loving human beings had been
simply starved to death.  Such a man as this, however anxious to be kind
and helpful, of course could not enter in the least into the position of
Clarice.  He told her many very true things, if she had been capable of
receiving them; he tried his very best to help her; but she felt through
it all that they were barbarians to each other, and that Father Bevis
regarded her as partially incomprehensible and wholly silly.

Father Bevis told Clarice that the chief end of man was to glorify God,
and to enjoy Him for ever; that no love was worthy in comparison with
His; that he who loved father and mother more than Christ was not worthy
of Him.  All very true, but the stunned brain and lacerated heart could
not take it in.  The drugs were pure and precious, but they were not the
medicine for her complaint.  She only felt a sensation of repulsion.

Clarice did not know that the Earl was doing his very best to rescue
her.  He insisted on Father Miles going to the Countess about it; nay,
he even ventured an appeal to her himself, though it always cost him
great pain to attempt a conversation with this beloved but irresponsive
woman.  But he took nothing by his motion.  The Countess was as
obstinate as she was absolute.  If anything, the opposition to her will
left her just a shade more determined.  In vain her husband pleaded
earnestly with her not to spoil two lives.  Hers had been spoiled, she
replied candidly: these ought not to be better off, nor should they be.

"Life has been spoiled for us both," said the Earl, sadly; "but I should
have thought that a reason why we might have been tenderer to others."

"You are a fool!" said the Countess with a flash of angry scorn.

They were the first words she had spoken to him for eighteen years.

"Maybe, my Lady," was the gentle answer.  "It would cost me less to be
accounted a fool than it would to break a heart."

And he left her, feeling himself baffled and his endeavours useless, yet
with a glow at his heart notwithstanding.  His Margaret had spoken to
him at last.  That her words were angry, even abusive, was a
consideration lost in the larger fact.  Tears which did not fall welled
up from the soft heart to the dove-like eyes, and he went out to the
terrace to compose himself.  "O Margaret, Margaret! if you could have
loved me!"  He never thought of blaming her--only of winning her as a
dim hope of some happy future, to be realised when it was God's will.
He had never yet dared to look his cross in the face sufficiently to
add, if it were God's will.

When the Monday came, which was to be the last day of Clarice's maiden
life, it proved a busy, bustling day, with no time for thought until the
evening.  Clarice lived through it as best she might.  Diana seemed to
have put her disappointment completely behind her, and to be thoroughly
consoled by the bustle and her _trousseau_.

One consideration never occurred to any of the parties concerned, which
would be thought rather desirable in the nineteenth century.  This was,
that the respective bridegrooms should have any interview with their
brides elect, or in the slightest degree endeavour to make themselves
agreeable.  They met at meals in the great hall, but they never
exchanged a word.  Clarice did not dare to lift her eyes, lest she
should meet those either of Vivian or Piers.  She kept them diligently
fixed upon her trencher, with which she did little else than look at it.

The evening brought a lull in the excitement and busy labour.  The
Countess, attended by Felicia, had gone to the Palace on royal
invitation.  Clarice sat on the terrace, her eyes fixed on the river
which she did not see, her hands lying listlessly in her lap.  Though
she had heard nothing, that unaccountable conviction of another
presence, which comes to us all at times, seized upon her; and she
looked up to see Piers Ingham.

The interview was long, and there is no need to add that it was painful.
The end came at last.

"Wilt thou forget me, Clarice?" softly asked Piers.

"I ought," was the answer, with a gush of tears, "if I can."

"I cannot," was the reply.  "But one pain I can spare thee, my beloved.
The Lady means to retain thee in her service as damsel of the chamber."
[Note 1.]

If Clarice could have felt any lesser grief beside the one great one,
she would have been sorry to hear that.

"I shall retire," said Sir Piers, "from my Lord's household.  I will not
give thee the misery of meeting me day by day.  Rather I will do what I
can to help thee to forget me.  It is the easier for me, since I have
had to offend my Lady by declining the hand of Felicia de Fay, which she
was pleased to offer me."

"The Lady offered Felicia to thee?"

Sir Piers bent his head in assent.  Clarice felt as if she could have
poisoned Felicia, and have given what arsenic remained over to the Lady
Margaret.

"And are we never to meet again?" she asked, with an intonation of
passionate sorrow.

"That must depend on God's will," said Sir Piers, gravely.

Clarice covered her face with both hands, and the bitter tears trickled
fast through her fingers.

"Oh, why is God's will so hard?" she cried.  "Could He not have left us
in peace?  We had only each other."

"Hush, sweet heart!  It is wrong to say that.  And yet it is hardly
possible not to think it."

"It is not possible!" sobbed Clarice.  "Does not God know it is not
possible?"

"I suppose He must," said Sir Piers, gloomily.

There was no comfort in the thought to either.  There never is any to
those who do not know God.  And Piers was only feeling after Him, if
haply he might find Him, and barely conscious even of that; while
Clarice had not reached even that point.  To both of them, in this very
anguish, Christ was saying, "Come unto Me;" but their own cry of pain
hindered them from hearing Him.  It was not likely they should hear,
just then, when the sunlight of life was being extinguished, and the
music was dying to its close.  But afterwards, in the silence and the
darkness, when the sounds were hushed and the lights were out, and there
was nothing that could be done but to endure, then the still, small
voice might make itself heard, and the crushed hearts might sob out
their answer.

So they parted.  "They took but ane kiss, and tare themselves away," to
meet when it was God's will, and not knowing on which side of the river
of death that would be.

Half an hour had passed since Sir Piers' step had died away on the
terrace, and Clarice still sat where he had left her, in crushed and
silent stillness.  If this night could only be the end of it!  If things
had not to go on!

"Clarice," said a pitying voice; and a hand was laid upon her head as if
in fatherly blessing.

Clarice was too stunned with pain to remember her courtly duties.  She
only looked up at Earl Edmund.

"Clarice, my poor child!  I want thee to know that I did my best for
thee."

"I humbly thank your Lordship," Clarice forced herself to say.

"And it may be, my child, though it seems hard to believe, that God is
doing His best for thee too."

"Then what would His worst be?" came in a gush from Clarice.

"It might be that for which thou wouldst thank Him now."

The sorrowing girl was arrested in spite of herself, for the Earl spoke
in that tone of quiet certainty which has more effect on an undecided
mind than any words.  She wondered how he knew, not realising that he
knows "more than the ancients" who knows God and sorrow.

"My child," said the Earl again, "man's best and God's best are often
very different things.  In the eyes of Monseigneur Saint Jacob, the best
thing would have been to spare his son from being cast into the pit and
sold to the Ishmaelites.  But God's best was to sell the boy into
slavery, and to send him into a dungeon, and then to lift him up to the
steps of the king's throne.  When _then_ comes, Clarice, we shall be
satisfied with what happened to us now."

"When will it come, my Lord?" asked Clarice, in a dreary tone.

"When it is best," replied the Earl quietly.

"Your Lordship speaks as if you knew!" said Clarice.

"God knows.  And he who knows God may be sure of everything else."

"Is it so much to know God?"

"It is life.  `Without God' and `Without hope' are convertible terms."

"My Lord," said Clarice, wondering much to hear a layman use language
which it seemed to her was only fit for priests, "how may one know God?"

"Go and ask Him.  How dost thou know any one?  Is it not by converse and
companionship?"

There was a silent pause till the Earl spoke again.

"Clarice," he said, "our Lord has a lesson to teach thee.  It rests with
thee to learn it well or ill.  If thou choose to be idle and obstinate,
and refuse to learn, thou mayst sit all day long on the form in
disgrace, and only have the task perfect at last when thou art wearied
out with thine own perverseness.  But if thou take the book willingly,
and apply thyself with heart and mind, the task will be soon over, and
the teacher may give thee leave to go out into the sunshine."

"My Lord," said Clarice, "I do not know how to apply your words here.
How can I learn this task quickly?"

"Dost thou know, first, what the task is?"

"Truly, no."

"Then let a brother tell thee who has had it set to him.  It is a hard
lesson, Clarice, and one that an inattentive scholar can make yet harder
if he will.  It is, `Not my will, but Thine, be done.'"

"I cannot!  I cannot!" cried Clarice passionately.

"Some scholars say that," replied the Earl gently, "until the evening
shadows grow very long.  They are the weariest of all when they reach
home."

"My Lord, pardon me, but you cannot understand it!"  Clarice stood up.
"I am young, and you--"

"I am over forty years," replied the Earl.  "Ah, child, dost thou make
that blunder?--dost thou think the child's sorrows worse than the man's?
I have known both, and I tell thee the one is not to be compared to the
other.  Young hearts are apt to think it, for grief is a thing new and
strange to them.  But if ever it become to thee as thy daily bread, thou
wilt understand it better.  It has been mine, Clarice, for eighteen
years."

That was a year more than Clarice had been in the world.  She looked up
wonderingly into the saddened, dove-like Plantagenet eyes--those eyes
characteristic of the House--so sweet in repose, so fiery in anger.
Clarice had but a dim idea what his sorrow was.

"My Lord," she said, half inquiringly, "methinks you never knew such a
grief as mine?"

The smile which parted the Earl's lips was full of pity.

"Say rather, maiden, that thou never knewest one like mine.  But God
knows both, Clarice, and He pities both, and when His time comes He will
comfort both.  At the best time, child!  Only let us acquaint ourselves
with Him, for so only can we be at peace.  And now, farewell.  I had
better go in and preach my sermon to myself."

Clarice was left alone again.  She did not turn back to exactly the same
train of thought.  A new idea had been given her, which was to become
the germ of a long train of others.  She hardly put it into words, even
to herself; but it was this--that God meant something.  He was not
sitting on the throne of the universe in placid indifference to her
sorrows; neither was He a malevolent Being who delighted in interfering
with the plans of His creatures simply to exhibit His own power.  He was
doing this--somehow--for her benefit.  She saw neither the how nor the
why; but He saw them, and He meant good to her.  All the world was not
limited to the Slough of Despond at her feet.  There was blue sky above.

Very vaguely Clarice realised this.  But it was sufficient to soften the
rocky hardness which had been the worst element of her pain--to take
away the blind chance against which her impotent wings had been beaten
in vain efforts to escape from the dark cage.  It was that contact with
"the living will of a living person," which gives the human element to
what would otherwise be hard, blind, pitiless fate.

Clarice rose, and looked up to the stars.  No words came.  The cry of
her heart was, "O Lord, I am oppressed; undertake for me."  But she was
too ignorant to weave it into a prayer.  When human hearts look up to
God in wordless agony, the Intercessor translates the attitude into the
words of Heaven.

Sad or bright, there was no time for thought on the Tuesday morning.
The day was bitterly cold, for it was the 16th of January 1291, and a
heavy hoar-frost silvered all the trees, and weighed down the bushes in
the Palace garden.  Diana, wrapped in her white furs, was the picture of
health and merriment.  Was it because she really had not enough heart to
care, or because she was determined not to give herself a moment to
consider?  Clarice, white as the fur round her throat, pale and
heavy-eyed, grave and silent, followed Diana into the Palace chapel.
The Countess was there, handsomely attired, and the Earl, in golden
armour; but they stood on opposite sides of the chancel, and the former
ignored her lord's existence.  Diana's wedding came first.  De Chaucombe
behaved a little more amiably than usual, and, contrary to all his
habits, actually offered his hand to assist his bride to rise.  Then
Diana fell back to the side of the Countess, and Fulk to that of the
Earl, and Clarice recognised that the moment of her sacrifice was come.

With one passionately pleading look at the Lady Margaret--who met it as
if she had been made of stone--Clarice slowly moved forward to the
altar.  She shuddered inwardly as Vivian Barkeworth took her hand into
his clasp, and answered the queries addressed to her in so low a voice
that Father Miles took the words for granted.  It seemed only a few
minutes before she woke to the miserable truth that she was now Vivian's
wife, and that to think any more of Piers Ingham was a sin against God.

Clarice dragged herself through the bridal festivities--how, she never
knew.  Diana was the life of the party.  So bright and gay she was that
she might never have heard of such a thing as disappointment.  She
danced with everybody, entered into all the games with the zest of an
eager child, and kept the hall ringing with merry laughter, while
Clarice moved through them all as if a weight of lead were upon her, and
looked as though she should never smile again.  Accident at length threw
the two brides close together.

"Art thou going to look thus woe-begone all thy life through, Clarice?"
inquired the Lady De Chaucombe.

"I do not know," answered Clarice, gloomily.  "I only hope it will not
be long."

"What will not be long?--thy sorrowful looks?"

"No--my life."

"Don't let me hear such nonsense," exclaimed Diana, with a little of her
old sharpness.  "Men are all deceivers, child.  There is not one of them
worth spoiling a woman's life for.  Clarice, don't be a simpleton!"

"Not more than I can help," said Clarice, with the shadow of a smile;
and then De Echingham came up and besought her hand for the next dance,
and she was caught away again into the whirl.

The dancing, which was so much a matter of course at a wedding, that
even the Countess did not venture to interfere with it, was followed by
the hoydenish romps which were considered equally necessary, and which
fell into final desuetude about the period of the accession of the House
of Hanover.  King Charles the First's good taste had led him to frown
upon them, and utterly to prohibit them at his own wedding; but the
people in general were attached to their amusements, rough and even
gross as they often were, and the improvement filtered down from palace
to cottage only very slowly.

The cutting of the two bride-cakes, as usual, was one of the most
interesting incidents.  It was then, and long afterwards, customary to
insert three articles in a bride-cake, which were considered to foretell
the fortunes of the persons in whose possession they were found when the
cakes were cut up.  The gold ring denoted speedy marriage; the silver
penny indicated future wealth; while the thimble infallibly doomed its
recipient to be an old maid.  The division of Diana's cake revealed Sir
Reginald de Echingham in possession of the ring, evidently to his
satisfaction; while Olympias, with the reverse sensation, discovered in
her slice both the penny and the thimble.  Clarice's cake proved even
more productive of mirth; for the thimble fell to the Countess, while
the Earl held up the silver penny, laughingly remarking that he was the
last person who ought to have had that, since he had already more of
them than he wanted.  But the fun came to its apex when the ring was
discovered in the hand of Mistress Underdone, who indignantly asserted
that if a thousand gold rings were showered upon her from as many cakes
they would not induce her to marry again.  She thought two husbands were
enough for any reasonable woman; and if not, she was too old now for
folly of that sort.  Sir Lambert sent the company into convulsions of
laughter by clasping his hands on this announcement with a look of
pretended despair, upon which Mistress Underdone, justly indignant, gave
him such a box on the ear that he was occupied in rubbing it for the
next ten minutes, thereby increasing the merriment of the rest.  Loudest
and brightest of all the laughers was Diana.  She at least had not
broken her heart.  Clarice, pale and silent in the corner, where she sat
and watched the rest, dimly wondered if Diana had any heart to break.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  There were two divisions of "damsels" in the household of a
mediaeval princess, the _domicellae_ and the _domicellae camera_.  The
former, who corresponded to the modern Maids of Honour, were young and
unmarried; the latter, the Ladies of the Bedchamber, were always married
women.  Sufficient notice of this distinction has not been taken by
modern writers.  Had it so been, the supposition long held of the
identity of Philippa Chaucer, _domicella camera_, with Philippa Pycard,
_domicella_, could scarcely have arisen; nor should we be told that
Chaucer's marriage did not occur until 1369, or later, when we find
Philippa in office as Lady of the Bedchamber in 1366.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

DAME MAISENTA DOES NOT SEE IT.

  "With a little hoard of maxims, preaching down a daughter's
  heart."--_Tennyson_.

Earl Edmund had not been callous to the white, woeful face under one of
the bridal wreaths.  He set himself to think how most pleasantly to
divert the thoughts of Clarice; and the result of his meditations was a
request to Father Miles that he would induce the Countess to invite the
parents of Clarice on a visit.  The Countess always obeyed Father Miles,
though had she known whence the suggestion came, she might have been
less docile.  A letter, tied up with red silk, and sealed with the
Countess's seal, was despatched by a messenger to Dame La Theyn, whom it
put into no small flutter of nervous excitement.

A journey to London was a tremendous idea to that worthy woman, though
she lived but forty miles from the metropolis.  She had never been there
in her life.  Sir Gilbert had once visited it, and had dilated on the
size, splendour, and attractions of the place, till it stood, in the
Dame's eyes, next to going to Heaven.  It may, indeed, be doubted if she
would not have found herself a good deal more at home in the former
place than the latter.

Three sumpter-mules were laden with the richest garments and ornaments
in the wardrobes of knight and dame.  Two armed servants were on one
horse, Sir Gilbert and his wife on another; and thus provided, late in
February, they drew bridle at the gate of Whitehall Palace.  Clarice had
not been told of their coming by the Countess, because she was not
sufficiently interested; by the Earl, because he wished it to be a
pleasant surprise.  She was called out into the ante-chamber one
afternoon, and, to her complete astonishment, found herself in the
presence of her parents.

The greeting was tolerably warm.

"Why, child, what hast done to thy cheeks?" demanded Sir Gilbert, when
he had kissed his palefaced daughter.  "'Tis all the smoke--that's what
it is!"

"Nay; be sure 'tis the late hours," responded the Dame.  "I'll warrant
you they go not to bed here afore seven o' the clock.  Eh, Clarice?"

"Not before eight, Dame," answered Clarice, with a smile.

"Eight!" cried Dame Maisenta.  "Eh, deary me!  Mine head to a pod of
peas, but that's a hearing!  And what time get they up of a morrow?"

"The Lady rises commonly by five or soon after."

"Saint Wulstan be our aid!  Heard I ever the like?  Why, I am never abed
after three!"

"So thou art become Dame Clarice?" said her father, jovially.

The smile died instantly from Clarice's lips.  "Yes," she said,
drearily.

"Where is thy knight, lass?" demanded her mother.

"You will see him in hall," replied Clarice.  And when they went down to
supper she presented Vivian in due form.

No one knew better than Vivian Barkeworth how to adapt himself to his
company.  He measured his bride's parents as accurately, in the first
five minutes, as a draper would measure a yard of calico.  It is not
surprising if they were both delighted with him.

The Countess received her guests with careless condescension, the Earl
with kind cordiality.  Dame La Theyn was deeply interested in seeing
both.  But her chief aim was a long _tete-a-tete_ discourse with
Clarice, which she obtained on the day following her arrival.  The
Countess, as usual, had gone to visit a shrine, and Clarice, being off
duty, took her mother to the terrace, where they could chat undisturbed.

Some of us modern folks would rather shrink from sitting on an open
terrace in February; but our forefathers were wonderfully independent of
the weather, and seem to have been singularly callous in respect to heat
and cold.  Dame La Theyn made no objection to the airiness of her
position, but settled herself comfortably in the corner of the stone
bench, and prepared for her chat with much gusto.

"Well, child," was the Dame's first remark, "the good saints have
ordered matters rarely for thee.  I ventured not to look for such good
fortune, not so soon as this.  Trust me, but I was rejoiced when I read
thy lady's letter, to hear that thou wert well wed unto a knight, and
that she had found all the gear.  I warrant thee, the grass grew not
under my feet afore Dame Rouse, and Mistress Swetapple, and every woman
of our neighbours, down to Joan Stick-i'-th'-Lane, knew the good luck
that was come to thee."

Clarice sat with her hands in her lap looking out on the river.  Good
luck!  Could Dame La Theyn see no further than that!

"Why, lass, what is come to thee?" demanded the Dame, when she found no
response.  "Sure, thou art not ungrateful to thy lady for her care and
goodness!  That were a sin to be shriven for."

Clarice turned her wan face towards her mother.

"Grateful!" she said.  "For what should I be thankful to her?  Dame, she
has torn me away from the only one in the world that I loved, and has
forced me to wed a man whom I alike fear and hate.  Do you think that
matter for thankfulness, or does she!"

"Tut, tut!" said the Dame.  "Do not ruffle up thy feathers like a pigeon
that has got bread-crumbs when he looked for corn!  Why, child, 'tis but
what all women have to put up with.  We all have our calf-loves and bits
of maidenly fancies, but who ever thought they were to rule the roast?
Sure, Clarice, thou hast more sense than so?"

"Dame, pardon me, but you understand not.  This was no light love of
mine--no passing fancy that a newer one might have put out.  It was the
one hope and joy of my whole life.  I had nothing else to live for."

To Clarice's horror, the rejoinder to her rhetoric was what the Dame
herself would have called "a jolly laugh."

"Dear, dear, how like all young maids be!" cried the mother.  "Just the
very thought had I when my good knight my father sent away Master Pride,
and told me I must needs wed with thy father, Sir Gilbert.  That is
twenty years gone this winter Clarice, and I swear to thee I thought
mine heart was broke.  Look on me now.  Look I like a woman that had
brake her heart o' love?  I trow not, by my troth!"

No; certainly no one would have credited that rosy, comfortable matron
with having broken her heart any number of years ago.

"And thou wilt see, too, when twenty years be over, Clarice, I warrant
thee thou shalt look back and laugh at thine own folly.  Deary me,
child!  Folks cannot weep for ever and the day after.  Wait till thou
art forty, and then see if thy trouble be as sore in thy mind then as
now."

Forty!  Should she ever be forty?  Clarice fondly hoped not.  And would
any lapse of years change the love which seemed to her interwoven with
every fibre of her heart?  That heart cried out and said, Impossible!
But Dame La Theyn heard no answer.

"When thou hast dwelt on middle earth [Note 1], child, as long as I
have, thou wilt look on things more in proportion.  There be other
affairs in life than lovemaking.  Women spend not all their days
thinking of wooing, and men still less.  I warrant thee thy lover, whoso
he be, shall right soon comfort himself with some other damsel.  Never
suspect a man of constancy, child.  They know not what the word means."

Clarice's inner consciousness violently contradicted this sweeping
statement.  But she kept silence still.

"Ah, I see!" said her mother, laughing.  "Not a word dost thou credit
me.  I may as well save my breath to cool my porridge.  Howsoe'er,
Clarice, when thou hast come to forty years, if I am yet alive, let me
hear thy thoughts thereupon.  Long ere that time come, as sure as eggs
be eggs, thou shalt be a-reading the same lesson to a lass of thine, if
it please God so to bless thee.  And she'll not believe thee a word, any
more than thou dost me.  Eh, these young folks, these young folks!
truly, they be rare fun for us old ones.  They think they've gotten all
the wisdom that ever dwelt in King Solomon's head, and we may stand
aside and doff our caps to them.  Good lack!--but this world is a queer
place, and a merry!"

Clarice thought she had not found it a merry locality by any means.

"And what ails thee at thy knight, child?  He is as well-favoured and
tall of his hands as e'er a one.  Trust me, but I liked him well, and so
said thy father.  He is a pleasant fellow, no less than a comely.  What
ails thee at him?"

"Dame, I cannot feel to trust him."

"Give o'er with thy nonsense!  Thou mayest trust him as well as another
man.  They are all alike.  They want their own way, and to please
themselves, and if they've gotten a bit of time and thought o'er they'll
maybe please thee at after.  That's the way of the world, child.  If
thou art one of those silly lasses that look for a man who shall never
let his eyes rove from thee, nor never make no love to nobody else, why,
thou mayest have thy search for thy pains.  Thou art little like to
catch that lark afore the sky falls."

Clarice thought that lark had been caught for her, and had been torn
from her.

"And what matter?" continued Dame La Theyn.  "If a man likes his wife
the best, and treats her reasonable kind, as the most do--and I make no
doubt thine shall--why should he not have his little pleasures?  Thou
canst do a bit on thine own account.  But mind thou, keep on the
windward side o' decency.  'Tis no good committing o' mortal sin, and a
deal o' trouble to get shriven for it.  Mind thy ways afore the world!
And let not thy knight get angered with thee, no more.  But I'll tell
thee, Clarice, thou wilt anger him afore long, to carry thyself thus
towards him.  Of course a man knows he must put up with a bit of
perversity and bashfulness when he is first wed; because he can guess
reasonable well that the maid might not have chose him her own self.
But it does not do to keep it up.  Thou must mind thy ways, child."

Clarice was almost holding her breath.  Whether horror or disgust were
the feeling uppermost in her mind, she would have found difficult to
tell.  Was this her mother, who gave her such counsel?  And were all
women like that?  _One_ other distinct idea was left to her--that there
was an additional reason for dying--to get out of it all.

"Thou art but a simple lass, I can see," reflectively added Dame La
Theyn.  "Thou hast right the young lass's notions touching truth, and
faith, and constancy, and such like.  All a parcel of moonshine, child!
There is no such thing, not in this world.  Some folks be a bit worse
than others, but that's all.  I dare reckon thy knight is one of the
better end.  At any rate, thou wilt find it comfortable to think so."

Clarice was inwardly convinced that Vivian belonged to the scrag end, so
far as character went.

"That's the true way to get through the world, child.  Shut thy eyes to
whatever thou wouldst not like to see.  Nobody'll admire thee more for
having red rims to 'em.  And, dear heart, where's the good?  'Tis none
but fools break their hearts.  Wise folks jog on jollily.  And if
there's somewhat to forgive on the one side, why, there'll be somewhat
on the other.  Thou art not an angel--don't fancy it.  And if he isn't
neither--"

Of that fact Clarice felt superlatively convinced.

"The best way is not to expect it of him, and thou wilt be the less
disappointed.  So get out thy ribbons and busk thee, and let's have no
more tears shed.  There's been a quart too much already."

A slight movement of nervous impatience was the sole reply.

"Eh, Clarice?  Ne'er a word, trow?"

Then she turned round a wan, set, distressed face, with fervent
determination glowing in the eyes.

"Mother!  I would rather die, and be out of it!"

"Be out of what, quotha?" demanded Dame La Theyn, in astonished tones.

"This world," said Clarice, through her set teeth.  "This hard, cold,
cruel, miserable, wicked world.  Is there only one of two lives before
me--either to harden into stone and crush other hearts, or to be crushed
by the others that have got hard before me?  Oh, Mother, Mother! is
there nothing in the world for a woman but _that_?--God, let me die
before I come to either!"

"Deary, deary, deary me!" seemed to be all that Dame La Theyn felt
herself capable of saying.

"A few weeks ago," Clarice went on, "before--_this_, there was a higher
and better view of life given to me.  One that would make _one's_
crushed heart grow softer, and not harder; that was upward and not
downward; that led to Heaven and God, not to Hell and Satan.  There is
no hope for me in this life but the hope of Heaven.  For pity's sake let
me keep that!  If every other human creature is going down--you seem to
think so--let me go higher, not lower.  Because my life has been spoiled
for me, shall I deliberately poison my own soul?  May God forbid it me!
If I am to spend my life with demons, let my spirit live with God."

The feelings of Dame La Theyn, on hearing this speech from Clarice, were
not capable of expression in words.

In her eyes, as in those of all Romanists, there were two lives which a
man or woman could lead--the religious and the secular.  To lead a
religious life meant, as a matter of course, to go into the cloister.
Matrimony and piety were simply incompatible.  Clarice was a married
woman: _ergo_, she could not possibly be religious.  Dame La Theyn's
mind, to use one of her favourite expressions, was all of a jumble with
these extraordinary ideas of which her daughter had unaccountably got
hold.  "What on earth is the child driving at? is she mad?" thought her
mother.

"What dost thou mean, child?" inquired the extremely puzzled Dame.
"Thou canst not go into the cloister--thou art wed.  Dear heart, but I
never reckoned thou hadst any vocation!  Thou shouldst have told thy
lady."

"I do not want the cloister," said Clarice.  "I want to do God's will.
I want to belong to God."

"Why, that is the same thing!" responded the still perplexed woman.

"The Lord Earl is not a monk," replied Clarice.  "And I am sure he
belongs to God, for he knows Him better than any priest that I ever
saw."

"Child, child!  Did I not tell thee, afore ever thou earnest into this
house, that thy Lord was a man full of queer fancies, and all manner of
strange things?  Don't thee go and get notions into thine head, for
mercy's sake!  Thou must live either in the world or the cloister.  Who
ever heard of a wedded woman devote to religion?  Thou canst not have
both--'tis nonsense.  Is that one of thy Lord's queer notions?  Sure,
these friars never taught thee so?"

"The friars never taught me anything.  Father Bevis tried to help me,
but he did not know how.  My Lord was the only one who understood."

"Understood?  Understood what?"

"Who understood me, and who understood God."

"Clarice, what manner of tongue art thou talking?  'Tis none I never
learned."

No, for Clarice was beginning to lisp the language of Canaan, and "they
that kept the fair were men of this world."  What wonder if she and her
thoroughly time-serving mother found it impossible to understand each
other?

"I cannot make thee out, lass.  If thou wert aware afore thou wert wed
that thou hadst a vocation, 'twas right wicked of thee not to tell thy
confessor and thy mistress, both.  But I cannot see how it well could,
when thou wert all head o'er ears o' love with some gallant or other--
the saints know whom.  I reckon it undecent, in very deed, Clarice, to
meddle up a love-tale with matters of religion.  I do wonder thou hast
no more sense of fitness and decorum."

"It were a sad thing," said Clarice quietly, "if only irreligious people
might love each other."

"Love each other!  Dear heart, thy brains must be made o' forcemeat!
Thou hast got love, and religion, and living, and all manner o' things,
jumbled up together in a pie.  They've nought to do with each other,
thou silly lass."

"If religion has nought to do with living, Dame, under your good
pleasure, what has it to do with?"

A query which Dame La Theyn found it as difficult to comprehend as to
answer.  In her eyes, religion was a thing to take to church on Sunday,
and life was restricted to the periods when people were not in church.
When she laid up her Sunday gown in lavender, she put her religion in
with it.  Of course, nuns were religious every day, but nobody else ever
thought of such an unreasonable thing.  Clarice's new ideas, therefore,
to her, were simply preposterous and irrational.

"Clarice!" she said, in tones of considerable surprise, "I do wonder
what's come o'er thee!  This is not the lass I sent to Oakham.  Have the
fairies been and changed thee, or what on earth has happened to thee?  I
cannot make thee out!"

"I hardly know what has happened to me," was the answer, "but I think it
is that I have gone nearer God.  He ploughed up my heart with the furrow
of bitter sorrow, and then He made it soft with the dew of His grace.  I
suppose the seed will come next.  What that is I do not know yet.  But
my knowing does not matter if He knows."

The difference which Dame La Theyn failed to understand was the
difference between life and death.  The words of the Earl had been used
as a seed of life, and the life was growing.  It is the necessity of
life to grow, and it is an impossibility that death should appreciate
life.

"Well!" was the Dame's conclusion, delivered as she rose from the stone
bench, in a perplexed and disappointed tone, "I reckon thou wilt be like
to take thine own way, child, for I cannot make either head or tail of
thy notions.  Only I do hope thou wilt not set up to be unlike everybody
else.  Depend upon it, Clarice, a woman never comes to no good when she
sets up to be better than her neighbours.  It is bad enough in anybody,
but 'tis worser in a woman than a man.  I cannot tell who has stuck thy
queer notions into thee--whether 'tis thy Lord, or thy lover, or who;
but I would to all the saints he had let thee be.  I liked thee a deal
better afore, I can tell thee.  I never had no fancy for philosophy and
such."

"Mother," said Clarice softly, "I think it was God."

"Gently, child!  No bad language, prithee."  Dame La Theyn looked upon
pious language as profanity when uttered in an unconsecrated place.
"But if it were the Almighty that put these notions into thy head, I
pray He'll take 'em out again."

"I think not," quietly replied Clarice.

And so the scene closed.  Neither had understood the other, so far, at
least, as spiritual matters were concerned.  But in respect to the
secular question Dame La Theyn could enter into Clarice's thoughts more
than she chose to allow.  The dialogue stirred within her faint
memories--not quite dead--of that earlier time when her tears had flowed
for the like cause, and when she had felt absolutely certain that she
could never be happy again.  But her love had been of a selfish and
surface kind, and the wound, never more than skin-deep, had healed
rapidly and left no scar.  Was it surprising if she took it for granted
that her daughter's was of the same class, and would heal with equal
rapidity and completeness?  Beside this, she thought it very unwise
policy to let Clarice perceive that she did understand her in any wise.
It would encourage her in her folly, Dame La Theyn considered, if she
supposed that so wise a person as her mother could have any sympathy
with such notions.  So she wrapped herself complacently in her mantle of
wisdom, and never perceived that she was severing the last strand of the
rope which bound her child's heart to her own.

"O, purblind race of miserable men!"

How strangely we all spend our lives in the anxious labour of straining
out gnats, while we scarcely detect the moment when we swallow the
camel!

A long private conversation between Clarice's parents resulted the next
day in Sir Gilbert taking her in hand.  His comprehension was even less
than her mother's, though it lay in a different direction.

"Well, Clarice, my dame tells me thou art not altogether well pleased
with thy wedding.  What didst thou wish otherwise, lass?"

"The man," said Clarice, shortly enough.

"What, is not one man as good as another?" demanded her father.

"Not to me, Sir," said his daughter.

"I am afeared, Clarice, thou hast some romantic notions.  They are all
very pretty to play with, but they don't do for this world, child.  Thou
hast better shake them out of thine head, and be content with thy lot."

"It is a bad world, I know," replied Clarice.  "But it is hard to be
content, when life has been emptied and spoiled for one."

"Folly, child, folly!" said Sir Gilbert.  "Thou mayest have as many silk
gowns now as thou couldst have had with any other knight; and I dare be
bound Sir Vivian should give thee a gold chain if thou wert pining for
it.  Should that content thee?"

"No, Sir."

Sir Gilbert was puzzled.  A woman whose perfect happiness could not be
secured by a gold chain was an enigma to him.

"Then what would content thee?" he asked.

"What I can never have now," answered Clarice.  "It may be, as time goes
on, that God will make me content without it--content with His will, and
no more.  But I doubt if even He could do that just yet.  The wisest
physician living cannot heal a wound in a minute.  It must have its
time."

Sir Gilbert tried to puzzle his way through this speech.

"Well, child, I do not see what I can do for thee."

"I thank you for wishing it, fair Sir.  No, you can do nothing.  No one
can do anything for me, except let me alone, and pray to God to heal the
wound."

"Well, lass, I can do that," said her father, brightening.  "I will say
the rosary all over for thee once in the week, and give a candle to our
Lady.  Will that do thee a bit of good, eh?"

Clarice had an instinctive feeling, that while the rosary and the candle
might be a doubtful good, the rough tenderness of her father was a
positive one.  Little as Sir Gilbert could enter into her ideas, his
affection was truer and more unselfish than that of her mother.  Neither
of them was very deeply attached to her; but Sir Gilbert's love could
have borne the harder strain of the two.  Clarice began to recognise the
fact with touched surprise.

"Fair Sir, I shall be very thankful for your prayers.  It will do me
good to be loved--so far as anything can do it."

Sir Gilbert was also discovering, with a little astonishment himself,
that his only child lay nearer to his heart than he had supposed.  His
heart was a plant which had never received much cultivation, either from
himself or any other; and love, even in faint throbs, was a rather
strange sensation.  It made him feel as if something were the matter
with him, and he could not exactly tell what.  He patted Clarice's
shoulder, and smoothed down her hair.

"Well, well, child!  I hope all things will settle comfortably by and
by.  But if they should not, and in especial if thy knight were ever
unkindly toward thee--which God avert!--do not forget that thou hast a
friend in thine old father.  Maybe he has not shown thee over much
kindliness neither, but I reckon, my lass, if it came to a pull, there'd
be a bit to pull at."

Neither Sir Gilbert nor Dame Maisenta ever fully realised the result of
that visit.  It found Clarice indifferent to both, but ready to reach
out a hand to either who would clasp it with any appearance of
tenderness and compassion.  It left her with a heart closed for ever to
her mother, but for ever open to her father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  This mediaeval term for the world had its rise in the notion
that earth stood midway between Heaven and Hell, the one being as far
below as the other was above.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

THE SHADOW OF THE FUTURE.

  In His name was struck the blow
  That hath laid thy old life low
  In a garb of blood-red woe.

A very eventful year was 1291 in England and over all the civilised
world.  It was the end of the Crusades, the Turks driving the Christians
from Acre, the last place which they held in Palestine.  It opened with
the submission of the Scottish succession to the arbitrament of Edward
the First, and it closed with the funeral of his mother, Queen Eleonore
of Provence--a woman whom England was not able to thank for one good
deed during her long and stormy reign.  She had been a youthful beauty,
she wrote poetry, and she had never scandalised the nation by any
impropriety of womanly conduct.  But these three statements close the
list of her virtues.  She was equally grasping, unscrupulous, and
extravagant.  In her old age she retired to the Convent of Amesbury,
where her two granddaughters, Mary of England, and Alianora of Bretagne,
were nuns already, for the desirable purpose of "making her salvation."
Perhaps she thought she had made it when the summons came to her in the
autumn of 1291.  No voice had whispered to her, all through her long
life of nearly eighty years, that if that ever were to be--

  "Jesus Christ has done it all
  Long, long ago."

Matters had settled down quietly enough in Whitehall Palace.  Sir Fulk
de Chaucombe and Diana had been promoted to the royal household--the
former as attendant upon the King, the latter as Lady of the Bedchamber
to his eldest daughter, the Princess Alianora, who, though twenty-seven
years of age, was still unmarried.  It was a cause of some surprise in
her household that the Countess of Cornwall did not fill up the vacancy
created among her maidens by the marriages of Clarice and Diana.  But
when December came it was evident that before she did so she meant to
make the vacancy still more complete.

One dark afternoon in that cheerful month, the Lady Margaret marched
into the bower, where her female attendants usually sat when not engaged
in more active waiting upon her.  It was Saturday.

"Olympias Trusbut, Roisia de Levinton," she said in her harsh voice,
which did not sound unlike the rasping of a file, "ye are to be wed on
Monday morning."

Olympias showed slight signs of going into hysterics, which being
observed by the Lady Margaret, she calmly desired Felicia to fetch a jug
of water.  On this hint of what was likely to happen to her if she
imprudently screamed or fainted, Olympias managed to recover.

"Ye are to wed the two squires," observed their imperious mistress.  "I
gave the choice to Reginald de Echingham, and he fixed on thee,
Olympias."

Olympias passed from terror to ecstasy.

"Thou, Roisia, art to wed Ademar de Gernet.  I will give both of you
your gear."

And away walked the Countess.

"I wish she would have let me alone," said Roisia, in doleful accents.

"Too much to hope for," responded Felicia.

"Dost thou not like De Gernet?" asked Clarice, sympathisingly.

"Oh, I don't dislike him," said Roisia; "but I am not so fond of him as
that comes to."

An hour or two later, however, Mistress Underdone appeared, in a state
of flurry by no means her normal one.

"Well, here is a pretty tale," said she.  "Not for thee, Olympias;
matters be running smooth for thee, though the Lord Earl did say," added
she, laughing, "that incense was as breath of life to Narcissus, and he
would needs choose the maid that should burn plenty on his altar.  But--
the thing is fair unheard of!--Ademar de Gernet refuses to wed under
direction from the Lady."

"Why?" asked Roisia, looking rather insulted.

"Oh, it has nought to do with thee, child," said Mistress Underdone.
"Quoth he that he desired all happiness to thee, and pardon of thee for
thus dealing; but having given his heart to another of the Lady's
damsels, he would not wed with any but her."

"Why, that must be Felicia," said the other three together.

Felicia looked flattered and conscious.

"Well, I reckon so," answered Mistress Underdone.  "Howbeit, the Lady
hath sent for him hither, to know of him in thy presence what he would
be at."

"_Ha, chetife_!" exclaimed Roisia.  "I wish it had been somewhere else."

"Well, I cannot quite--.  Hush! here she comes."

And for the second time that day in stalked the Countess, and sat down
on the curule chair which Mistress Underdone set for her, looking like a
judge, and a very stern one, too.  In another minute the culprit made
his appearance, in charge of Sir Lambert Aylmer.

"Now, De Gernet, what means this?" irascibly demanded his mistress.

"Lady, it means not disobedience to you, nor any displeasance done to
this young damsel"--and De Gernet turned and bowed to Roisia.  "This it
means, that I dearly love another of your Ladyship's damsels, and I do
most humbly and heartily crave your permission to wed with her."

"What, Felicia de Fay?" said the Countess.

"Under your Ladyship's pleasure and her pardon, no."

Felicia's face changed evilly.

"But who, then?  There is none other."

"Let my Lady be pleased to pardon me.  There is one other--Heliet
Pride."

The faces in the bower just then might have furnished a study for an
artist.  Those of Clarice and Olympias expressed surprise mixed with
some pleasure; so did Mistress Underdone's, but the degree of both was
intense.  The Countess looked half vexed and wholly astonished, with a
little contempt superadded.  Felicia's face foreboded nothing but ill to
either Ademar or Heliet.

"Heliet Pride!" cried the Countess sharply.  "Why, man, she goes on
crutches!"

"They will carry her to the chapel, with my Lady's leave," answered De
Gernet, coolly.

"Gramercy, but thou wilt have a lovely wife!  There'll be no pride in
her outside her name," said the Countess, with a grim smile at her own
joke.  Indeed, she was so much amused that she forgot to be angry.

"I will see about that, if my Lady will grant me her grace," responded
De Gernet, in the same tone.

"Eh, thou shalt have her," said the Countess.  "I shall get Roisia
disposed of a sight easier than Heliet.  So be it.  Roisia, thou canst
still prepare for thy bridal; I will find somebody by Monday morning."

The Countess was rising from her chair, when Sir Lambert, after a glance
at Roisia, observed that if her Ladyship found any difficulty in that
selection, he had no particular objection to be chosen.

"You!" said the Countess.  "Oh, very good; it will save trouble.  Let it
be so."

Roisia appeared to be, if anything, rather gratified by the exchange.
But Clarice, looking into the dark, passionate eyes of Felicia, felt
troubled for the happiness of Heliet.

Olympias, like Clarice, was promoted to a vacancy among the ladies of
the bedchamber.  But Sir Lambert and Roisia passed away from the life at
Whitehall.  The new Maids of Honour were speedily appointed.  Their
names proved to be Sabina Babingell, Ada Gresley, and Filomena Bray.
The Countess declared her intention of keeping four only in the future.

The summer of 1292 saw the King on the Scottish border, and in his train
the Earl and Countess of Cornwall, with their household, moved north as
far as Oakham.  The household had been increased by one more, for in the
April previous Clarice Barkeworth became the mother of a little girl.
This was the first event which helped to reconcile her to her lot.  She
had been honestly trying hard to do her duty by Vivian, who scarcely
seemed to think that he had any duty towards her, beyond the obvious one
of civility in public.  All thought of Piers Ingham had been resolutely
crushed down, except when it came--as it sometimes did--in the form of a
dream of bliss from which she awoke to desolation.  A miserable day was
sure to follow one of those dreams.  The only other moment when she
allowed herself to think of him was in her evening prayer.

It was a relief to Clarice that she had never heard a word of Piers
since he left Whitehall.  Her work would have been harder if his name
had remained a household word.  And yet in another sense it was hard
never to know what had become of him, whether he were as sad as herself,
or had been comforted elsewhere.

Vivian's manners in public were perfect to every one, and Clarice shared
with the rest.  In private she was terribly snubbed whenever he was in a
bad temper, and carelessly ignored when he was in a good one.  The baby
daughter, who was such a comfort to Clarice, was a source of bitter
vexation to Vivian.  In his eyes, while a son would have been an
undoubted blessing, a daughter was something actively worse than a
disappointment.  When Clarice timidly inquired what name he wished the
child to bear, Vivian distinctly intimated that the child and all her
belongings were totally beneath his notice.  She could call the nuisance
what she liked.

Clarice silently folded her insulted darling to her breast, and tacitly
promised it that its mother at least should never think it a nuisance.

"What shall I call her?" she said to Mistress Underdone and Olympias,
both of whom were inclined to pet the baby exceedingly.

"Oh, something pretty!" said Olympias.  "Don't have a plain, common
name.  Don't call her Joan, or Parnel, or Beatrice, or Margery, or Maud,
or Isabel.  You meet those at every turn.  I am quite glad I was not
called anything of that sort."

"I wouldn't have it too long," was Mistress Underdone's recommendation.
"I'd never call her Frethesancia, or Florianora, or Aniflesia, or
Sauncelina.  Let her have a good, honest name, Dame, one syllable, or at
most two.  You'll have to clip it otherwise."

"I thought of Rose," said Clarice, meditatively.

"Well, it is not common," allowed Olympias.  "Still, it is very short.
Couldn't you have had it a _little_ longer?"

"That'll do," pronounced Mistress Underdone.  "It is short, and it means
a pretty, sweet, pleasant thing.  I don't know but I should have called
my girl Rose, if I'd chosen her name; but her father fancied Heliet, and
so it had to be so."

"Well, we can call her Rosamond," comfortingly suggested Olympias.

So, in the course of that evening, Father Bevis baptised little Rose
Barkeworth in the chapel of the palace, the Earl standing sponsor for
her, with the Lady de Chaucombe and the Lady de Echingham.  The Countess
had been asked, but to Clarice's private satisfaction had declined, for
she would much rather have had the Earl, and the canon law forbade
husband and wife being sponsors to the same infant.

Something was the matter with the Countess.  Every one agreed upon this,
but nobody could guess what it was.  She was quieter than her wont, and
was given to long, silent reveries, which had not been usual with her.

Filomena, who was of a lively turn of mind, declared that life at
Whitehall was becoming absolutely intolerable, and that she should be
thankful to go to Oakham, for at least it would be something new.

"Thou wilt be thankful to come away again," said Mistress Underdone,
with a smile.

They reached Oakham about the middle of July, and found Heliet, leaning
on her crutches, ready to welcome them with smiles in the hall.  No news
had reached her of their proceedings, and there was a great deal to tell
her; but Heliet and the baby took to one another in an instant, as if by
some unseen magical force.

The item of news which most concerned herself was not told to Heliet
that night.  The next morning, when all were seated at work, and baby
Rose, in Heliet's lap, was contentedly sucking her very small thumb,
Mistress Underdone said rather suddenly, "We have not told thee all,
Heliet."

"I dare say not," replied Heliet, brightly.  "You must have all done a
great deal more in these two years than you have told me."

"Well, lass, 'tis somewhat I never looked I should have to tell thee.
There's somebody wants to wed thee."

"Me!" cried Heliet, in large capitals.

"Ay, thee--crutches and all," said her mother laughing.  "He said he did
not care for thy crutches so they carried thee safe to chapel; and he
ran the risk of offending the Lady to get thee.  So I reckon he sets
some store by thee, lass."

"Who is it?" said Heliet, in a low voice, while a bright red spot burned
in each cheek.

"Ademar de Gernet."  Two or three voices told her.  The bright spots
burned deeper.

"Is it to be?" was the next question.

"Ay, the Lady said so much; and I reckon she shall give thee thy gear."

"God has been very good to me," said Heliet, softly, rocking little Rose
gently to and fro.  "But I never thought He meant to give me _that_!"

Clarice looked up, and saw a depth of happy love in the lame girl's
eyes, which made her sigh for herself.  Then, looking further, she
perceived a depth of black hate in those of Felicia de Fay, which made
her tremble for Heliet.

It appeared very shortly that the Countess was in a hurry to get the
wedding over.  Perhaps she was weary of weddings in her household, for
she did not seem to be in a good temper about this.  She always thought
Heliet would have had a vocation, she said, which would have been far
better for her, with her lameness, than to go limping into chapel to be
wed.  She wondered nobody saw the impropriety of it.  However, as she
had promised De Gernet, she supposed it must be so.  She did not know
what she herself could have been thinking about to make such a foolish
promise.  She was not usually so silly as that.  However, if it must be,
it had better be got over.

So got over it was, on an early morning in August, De Gernet receiving
knighthood from the Earl at the close of the ceremony.

Mistress Underdone had petitioned that her lame and only child might not
be separated from her, and the Countess--according to her own authority,
in a moment of foolishness--had granted the petition.  So Heliet was
drafted among the Ladies of the Bedchamber, but only as an honorary
distinction.

The manner of the Countess continued to strike every one as unusual.
Long fits of musing with hands lying idle were becoming common with her,
and when she rose from them she would generally shut herself up in her
oratory for the remainder of the day.  Clarice thought, and Heliet
agreed with her, that something was going to happen.  Once, too, as
Clarice was carrying Rose along the terrace, she was met by the Earl,
who stopped and noticed the child, as in his intense and unsatisfied
love for little children he always did.  Clarice thought he looked even
unwontedly sorrowful.

From the child, Earl Edmund looked up into the pleased eyes of the young
mother.

"Dame Clarice," he asked, gently, "are you happier than you were?"

Her eyes grew suddenly grave.

"Thus far," she said, touching the child.  "Otherwise--I try to be
content with God's will, fair Lord.  It is hard to bear heart-hunger."

"Ah!"  The Earl's tone was significant.  "Yes, it is hard to bear in any
form," he said, after a pause.  "May God send you never to know, Dame,
that there is a more terrible form than that wherein you bear it."

And he left her almost abruptly.

The winter of 1292 dragged slowly along.  Filomena declared that her
body was as starved as her mind, and she should be frozen to death if
she stayed any longer.  The next day, to everybody's astonishment, the
Countess issued orders to pack up for travelling.  Sir Vivian and
Clarice were to go with her--where, she did not say.  So were Olympias,
Felicia, and Ada.  Mistress Underdone, Sir Reginald, Sir Ademar and
Heliet, Filomena and Sabina, were left behind at Oakham.

Olympias grumbled extremely at being separated from her husband, and
Filomena at being left behind.  The Countess would listen to neither.

"When shall we return, under my Lady's leave?" asked Olympias,
disconsolately.

"_You_ can return," was the curt answer, "when I have done with you.  I
doubt if Sir Vivian and his dame will return at all.  Ada certainly will
not."

"_Ha, jolife_!" said Ada, under her breath.  She did not like Oakham.

Clarice, on the contrary, was inclined to make an exclamation of horror.
For never to return to Oakham meant never to see Heliet again.  And
what could the Countess mean by a statement which sounded at least as if
_she_ were not intending to return?

Concerning Felicia the Countess said nothing.  That misnamed young lady
had during the past few months been trying her best to make Heliet
miserable.  She began by attempting to flirt with Sir Ademar, but she
found him completely impervious material.  Her arrows glanced upon his
shield, and simply dropped off without further notice.  Then she took to
taunting Heliet with her lameness, but Heliet kept her temper.  Next she
sneered at her religious views.  Heliet answered her gently, gravely,
but held her own with undiminished calmness.  This point had been
reached when the Countess's order was given to depart from Oakham.

Even those least disposed to note the signs of the times felt the
pressure of some impending calamity.  The strange manner of the
Countess, the restless misery of the Earl, whom they all loved, the
busy, bustling, secretly-triumphant air of Father Miles--all denoted
some hidden working.  Father Bevis had been absent for some weeks, and
when he returned he wore the appearance of a baffled and out-wearied
man.

"He looks both tired and disappointed," remarked Clarice to Heliet.

"He looks," said Heliet, "like a man who had been trying very hard to
scale the wall of a tower, and had been flung back, bruised and
helpless, upon the stones below."

During the four months last spent at Oakham, Clarice had been absolutely
silent to Heliet on the subject of her own peculiar trouble.  Perhaps
she might have remained so, had it not been for the approaching
separation.  But her lips were unsealed by the strong possibility that
they might never meet again.  It was late on the last evening that
Clarice spoke, as she sat rocking Rose's cradle.  She laid bare her
heart before Heliet's sympathising eyes, until she could trace the whole
weary journey through the arid desert sands.

"And now tell me, friend," Clarice ended, "why our Lord deals so
differently with thee and with me.  Are we not both His children?  Yet
to thee He hath given the desire of thine heart, and on mine He lays His
hand, and says, `No, child, thou must not have it.'"

"I suppose, beloved," was Heliet's gentle answer, "that the treatment
suitable for consumption will not answer for fever.  We are both sick of
the deadly disease of sin; but it takes a different development in each.
Shall we wonder if the Physician bleeds the one, and administers
strengthening medicines to the other?"

Clarice's lip quivered, but she rocked Rose's cradle without answering.

"There is also another consideration," pursued Heliet.  "If I mistake
not--to alter the figure--we have arrived at different points in our
education.  If one of us can but decline `_puer_,' while the other is
half through the syntax, is it any wonder if the same lesson be not
given to us to learn?  Dear Clarice, all God's children need keeping
down.  I have been kept down all these years by my physical sufferings.
That is not appointed to thee; thou art tried in another way.  Shall we
either marvel or murmur because our Father sees that each needs a
different class of discipline?"

"Oh, Heliet, if I might have had thine!  It seems to me so much the
lighter cross to carry."

"Then, dear, I am the less honoured--the further from the full share of
the fellowship of our Lord's sufferings."

Clarice shook her head as if she hardly saw it in that light.

"Clarice, let me tell thee a parable which I read the other day in the
writings of the holy Fathers.  There were once two monks, dwelling in
hermits' cells near to each other, each of whom had one choice tree
given him to cultivate.  When this had lasted a year, the tree of the
one was in flourishing health, while that of the other was all stunted
and bare.  `Why, brother,' said the first, `what hast thou done to thy
tree?'  `Now, judge thou, my brother,' replied the second, `if I could
possibly have done more for my tree than I have done.  I watched it
carefully every day.  When I thought it looked dry, I prayed for rain;
when the ground was too wet, I prayed for dry weather; I prayed for
north wind or south wind, as I saw them needed.  All that I asked, I
received; and yet look at my poor tree!  But how didst thou treat thine?
for thy plan has been so much more successful than mine that I would
fain try it next year.'  The other monk said only, `I prayed God to make
my tree flourish, and left it to Him to send what weather He saw good.'"

"He has sent a bitter blast from the north-east," answered Clarice, with
trembling lips.

"And a hedge to shelter the root of the tree," said Heliet, pointing to
Rose.

"Oh, my little Rosie!" exclaimed Clarice, kissing the child
passionately.  "But if God were to take her, Heliet, what would become
of me?"

"Do not meet trouble half way, dear," said Heliet, gently.  "There is no
apparent likelihood of any such thing."

"I do not meet it--it comes!" cried poor Clarice.

"Then wait till it comes.  `Sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof.'"

"Yet when one has learned by experience that evil is perpetually coming,
how can one help looking forward to the morrow?"

"Look forward," said Heliet.  "But let it be to the day after
to-morrow--the day when we shall awake up after Christ's likeness, and
be satisfied with it--when the Lord our God shall come, and all the
saints with Him.  Dear, a gem cannot be engraved without the
cutting-tools.  Wouldst thou rather be spared the pain of the cutting
than have Christ's likeness graven upon thee?"

"Oh, could it not be done with less cutting?"

"Yes--and more faintly graven then."

Clarice sobbed, without speaking.

"If the likeness is to be in high relief, so that all men may see it,
and recognise the resemblance, and applaud the graver, Clarice, the tool
must cut deep."

"If one could ever know that it was nearly done, it would be easier to
bear it."

"Ay, but how if the vision were granted us, and we saw that it was not
nearly done by many a year?  It is better not to know, dear.  Yet it is
natural to us all to think that it would be far easier if we could see.
Therefore the more `blessed is he that hath not seen, and yet hath
believed.'"

"I do think," said poor Clarice, drearily, "that I must be the worst
tried of all His people."

"Clarice," answered Heliet, in a low voice, "I believe there is one in
this very castle far worse tried than thou--a cross borne which is ten
times heavier than thine, and has no rose-bud twined around it.  And it
is carried with the patience of an angel, with the unselfish
forgetfulness of Christ.  The tool is going very deep there, and already
the portrait stands out in beautiful relief.  And that cross will never
be laid down till the sufferer parts with it at the very gate of Heaven.
At least, so it seems to me.  As the years go on it grows heavier, and
it is crushing him almost into the dust now."

"Whom dost thou mean, Heliet?"

"The Lord Earl, our master."

"I can see he is sorely tried; but I never quite understand what his
trouble is."

"The sorrow of being actively hated by the only one whom he loves.  The
prospect of being left to die, in wifeless and childless loneliness--
that terrible loneliness of soul which is so much worse to bear than any
mere physical solitude.  God, for some wise reason, has shut him up to
Himself.  He has deprived him of all human relationship and human love;
has said to him, `Lean on Me, and walk loose from all other ties.'  A
wedded man in the eyes of the world, God has called him in reality to be
an anchorite of the Order of Providence, to follow the Lamb
whithersoever He goeth.  And unless mine eyes see very wrongly into the
future--as would God they did!--the Master is about to lead this dear
servant into the Gethsemane of His passion, that he may be fashioned
like Him in all things.  Ah, Clarice, that takes close cutting!"

"Heliet, what dost thou mean?  Canst thou guess what the Lady is about
to do?"

"I think she is going to leave him."

"Alone?--for ever?"

"For earth," said Heliet, softly.  "God be thanked, that is not for
ever."

"What an intensely cruel woman she is!" cried Clarice, indignantly.

"Because, I believe, she is a most miserable one."

"Canst thou feel any pity for _her_?"

"It is not so easy as for him.  Yet I suspect she needs it even more
than he does.  Christ have mercy on them both!"

"I cannot comprehend it," said Clarice.

"I will tell thee one thing," answered Heliet.  "I would rather change
with thee than with Sir Edmund the Earl; and a hundred times rather with
thee than with the Lady Margaret.  It is hard to suffer; but it is worse
to be the occasion of suffering.  Let me die a thousand times over with
Saint Stephen, before I keep the clothes of the persecutors with Saul."

Clarice stooped and lifted the child from the cradle.

"It is growing late," she said.  "I suppose we ought not to be up
longer.  Good-night, sweetheart, and many thanks for thy counsel.  It is
all true, I know; yet--"

"In twenty years, may be--or at the longest, when thou hast seen His
Face in righteousness--dear Clarice, thou wilt know it, and want to add
no _yet_."

The soft tap of Heliet's crutches had died away, but Clarice stood still
with the child in her arms.

"It must be _yet_ now, however," she said, half aloud.  "Do Thy will
with me--cut me and perfect me; but, O God, leave me, leave me Rosie!"



CHAPTER NINE.

OVERWHELMED.

  "I am a useless and an evil man,--
  God planned my life, and let men spoil His plan."

  _Isabella Fyvie Mayo_.

Oakham was left behind; and to the surprise of the party--except the
Countess, her Prime Minister, Father Miles, and her Foreign Secretary,
Felicia--they found themselves lodged in Rochester Castle.  Here the
Countess shut herself up, and communicated with the outward world
through her Cabinet only.  All orders were brought to the ladies by
Felicia, and were passed to Vivian by Father Miles.  The latter was
closeted with his lady for long periods, and rolls of writing appeared
to be the result of these conferences.

The winter moved on with leaden feet, according to the ideas of the
household, and of Ada more particularly.

"This sort of life is really something dreadful!" said that young lady.
"If the frost would only break up, it would make something fresh to look
at.  There is _nothing_ to be done!"

"Poor Ada!" responded Olympias, laughing.  "Do get some needlework."

"I am tired of needlework," answered Ada.  "I am tired of everything!"

Felicia came in as the words were spoken.

"I have permission to tell you something," she said, with a light in her
black eyes which Clarice felt sure meant mischief.  "The Lady has
appealed to the holy Father for a divorce from the Lord Earl."

"Will she get it?" asked Olympias.

"No doubt of it," replied Felicia dogmatically.

"And if so, what will she do then?" asked Ada.

"Her pious intention," said Felicia, the black eyes dancing, "is to
become a holy Sister of the Order of the blessed Saint Dominic."

"Then what is to become of the Lord Earl?" queried Olympias.  "I suppose
he can marry somebody else.  I hope he will."

"That is no concern of the Lady's," said Felicia, in a tone of pious
severity.  "The religious do not trouble their holy repose about
externs, except to offer prayers for their salvation."

"Why, then, we shall all be turned out!" blankly cried Ada.  "What is to
become of us all?"

"What will become of me is already settled," replied Felicia demurely.
"I am about to make profession in the same convent with my mistress."

"Thank the saints!" reached Clarice's ears in a whisper from Olympias,
and was deliberately echoed in the heart of the former.

"But that will never do for me!" exclaimed Ada.  "I am sure I have no
vocation.  What am I to do?"

"The Lady proposes, in her goodness," said the Countess's mouthpiece,
"to get thee an appointment in the household of one of the Ladies the
King's daughters."

"_Ha, jolife_!" said Ada, and ceased her interjections.

"For you, Dames," continued Felicia, turning to Clarice and Olympias,
"she says that, being wedded, you are already provided for, and need no
thought on her part."

"Oh, then, I may go back to Oakham," answered Olympias in a satisfied
tone.  "That is what I want."

Clarice wondered sorrowfully what her lot would be--whether she might
return to Oakham.  She felt more at home there than anywhere else.  The
question was whether, Clarice being now at large, Vivian would continue
in the Earl's service; and even if he did, they might perhaps no longer
live in the Castle.  Clarice took this new trouble where she carried
them all; but the Earl's sorrow was more in her mind than her own.  She
was learning to cultivate:--

  "A heart at leisure from itself,
  To soothe and sympathise."

She found that Vivian had already heard the news from Father Miles, and
she timidly ventured to ask him what he intended to do.

After a few flights of rhetoric concerning the extreme folly of the
Countess--to forsake an earldom for the cloister was a proceeding not in
Vivian's line at all--that gentleman condescended so far to answer his
wife as to observe that he was not fool enough not to know when he was
well off.  Clarice thankfully conjectured that they would return to
Oakham.  She thought it better, however, to ask the question point
blank; and she received a reply--of course accompanied by a snub.

"Why should we be such fools as to go to Oakham when my Lord is in
Bermondsey?"

"Bermondsey!"  Clarice was surprised.  "You never know anything!" said
Vivian.  "Of course he is come to town."

Clarice received the snubbing in silence.  "You are so taken up with
that everlasting brat of yours," added Rose's affectionate father, "that
you never know what anybody else is doing."

There had been a time when Clarice would have defended herself against
such accusations.  She was learning now that she suffered least when she
received them in meek silence.  The only way to deal with Vivian
Barkeworth was to let him alone.

Two long letters went to the Pope that February; one was from the
Countess, the other from the Earl.  They are both yet extant, and they
show the character of each as no description could set it forth.

The Countess's letter is a mixture of pious demureness and querulous
selfishness.  She tells the Pope that all her life she has intensely
desired to be a nun: that she is, unhappily, in the irreligious position
of a matron, and, moreover, is the suffering wife of an impious husband.
This sinful man requires of her--of her, a soul devoted to religion--
that she shall behave as if she belonged to the wicked world which holds
himself within its thrall, and shall sacrifice God to him.  She humbly
and fervently entreats the holy Father to grant her a divorce from these
bonds of matrimony which so cruelly oppress her, and to set her soul
free that it may soar upwards unrestrained.  It is the letter of a woman
who did wish to serve God, but who was incapable of recognising that it
was possible to do it without shutting herself up in stone walls, and
starving body and soul alike.

The Earl's letter is of an entirely different calibre.  He tells the
Pope in his turn that he is wedded to a woman whom he dearly loves, and
who resolutely keeps him at arm's length.  She will not make a friend of
him, nor behave as a good wife ought to do.  This is all he asks of her;
he is as far as can be from wishing to be unkind to her or to cross her
wishes.  He only wants her to live with him on reasonable and ordinary
terms.  But she--and here the Earl's irrepressible humour breaks out; he
must see the comical side even of his own sorest trouble, and certainly
this had its comical side--she will not sit next to him at table, but
insists on putting her confessor between; she will not answer Yes or No
to his simplest question, but invariably returns the answer through a
third person.  When she goes into her private apartments, she turns the
key in his face.  Does the holy Father think this is the way that a
rational wife ought to behave to her own husband? and will he not
remonstrate with her, and induce her to use him a little more kindly and
reasonably than she does?  The Earl's letter is that of an injured and
justly provoked man; of a man who loves his wife too well to coerce or
quarrel with her, and who thoroughly perceives the absurdity of his
position no less than its pain.  Yet he does feel the pain bitterly, and
he would do anything to end it.

This letter to the Patriarch of Christendom was his last hope.
Entreaties, remonstrances, patient tenderness, loving kindness, all had
proved vain.  Now:--

  "He had set his life upon a cast,
  And he must run the hazard of the die."

Weary and miserable weeks they were, during which Earl Edmund waited the
Pope's answer.  It came at last.  The Pope replied as only a Romish
priest could be expected to reply.  For the human anguish of the one he
had no sympathy; for the quasi-religious sorrows of the other he had
very much.  He decreed, in the name of God, a full divorce between
Edmund Earl of Cornwall, and Margaret his wife, coldly admonishing the
Earl to take the Lord's chastening in good part, and to let the griefs
of earth lift his soul towards Heaven.

But it was not there that this sorrow lifted it at first.  The human
agony had to be lived through before the Divine calm and peace could
come to heal it.  His last effort had been made in vain.  The passionate
hope of twenty years, that the day would come when his long, patient
love should meet with its reward even on earth, was shattered to the
dust.  Even if she wished to come back after this, she could never
retrace her steps.  Compensation he might find in Heaven, but there
could be none left for him on earth now.  Even hope was dead within him.

The fatal Bull fell from the Earl's hand, and dropped a dead weight on
the rushes at his feet.  He was a heart-wrecked man, and life had to go
on.

Was this man--for his is no fancy picture--a poor weak creature, or was
he a strong, heroic soul?  Many will write him down the weakling;
perhaps all but those who have themselves known much of that hope
deferred which maketh the heart sick, and drains away the moral
life-blood drop by drop.  It may be that the registers of Heaven held
appended to his name a different epithet.  It is harder to wait than to
work; hardest of all to awake after long suspense to the blank
conviction that all has been in vain, and then to take up the cross and
meekly follow the Crucified.

Two hours later, a page brought a message to Reginald de Echingham to
the effect that he was wanted by his master.

Reginald, in his own eyes, was a thoroughly miserable man.  He had
nobody to talk with, and nothing to do.  He missed Olympias sadly, for
as the Earl had once jestingly remarked, she burnt perpetual incense on
his altar, and flattery was a necessary of life to Reginald.  Olympias
was the only person who admired him nearly as much as he did himself.
Like the old Romans, _partem et circenses_ constituted his list of
indispensables; and had it been inevitable to dispense with one of them
for a time, Reginald would have resigned the bread rather than the game.
On this particular morning, his basket of grievances was full.  The
damp had put his moustache out of curl; he had found a poor breakfast
provided for him--and Reginald was by no means indifferent to his
breakfast--and, worst of all, the mirror was fixed so high up on the
wall that he could not see himself comfortably.  The usual religious
rites of the morning before his own dear image had, therefore, to be
very imperfectly performed.  Reginald grumbled sorely within himself as
he went through the cold stone passages which led to the Earl's chamber.

His master lifted very sad eyes to his face.

"De Echingham, I wish to set out for Ashridge to-morrow.  Can you be
ready?"

Ashridge!  De Echingham would as soon have received marching orders for
Spitzbergen.  If there were one place in the world which he hated in his
inmost soul, it was that Priory in Buckinghamshire, which Earl Edmund
had himself founded.  He would be worse off there than even in
Bermondsey Palace, with nothing around him but silent walls and almost
equally silent monks.  De Echingham ventured on remonstrance.

"Would not your Lordship find Berkhamsted much more pleasurable,
especially at this season?"

"I do not want pleasure," answered the Earl wearily.  "I want rest."

And he rose and began to walk aimlessly up and down the room, in that
restless manner which was well suited to emphasise his words.

"But--your Lordship's pardon granted--would you not find it far better
to seek for distraction and pleasance in the Court, than to shut
yourself up in a gloomy cell with those monks?"

Earl Edmund stopped in his walk and looked at Reginald, whose speech
touched his quick sense of humour.

"I would advise you to give thanks in your prayers to-night, De
Echingham."

"For what, my Lord?"

"That you have as yet no conception of a sorrow which is past
distraction by pleasance.  `Vinegar upon nitre!'  You never tasted it, I
should think."

"I thank your Lordship, I never did," said Reginald, who took the
allusion quite literally.

"Well, I have done, and I did not like it," rejoined his master.  "I
prefer the monks' _soupe maigre_, if you please.  Be so good as to make
ready, De Echingham."

Reginald obeyed, but grumbling bitterly within his disappointed soul.
Could there be any misery on earth worse than a cold stone bench, a bowl
of sorrel soup, and a chapter of Saint Augustine to flavour it?  And
when they had only just touched the very edge of the London season!
Why, he would not get a single ball that spring.  Poor Reginald!

They stayed but one night at Berkhamsted, though, to the Earl,
Berkhamsted was home.  It was the scene of his birth, and of that
blessed unapprehensive childhood, when brothers and sisters had played
with him on the Castle green, and light, happy laughter had rung through
the noble halls; when the hand of his fair Provencal mother had fallen
softly in caresses on his head, and his generous, if extravagant, father
had been only too ready to shower gold ducats in anticipation of his
slightest wish.  All was gone now but the cold gold--hard, silent,
unfeeling; a miserable comforter indeed.  There was one brother left,
but he was far away--too far to recall in this desolate hour.  Like a
sufferer of later date, he must go alone with his God to bear his
passion.  [Note 1.]

The Priory of Ashridge--of the Order of Bonihomines--which Earl Edmund
had founded a few years before, was the only one of its class in
England.  The Predicant Friars were an offshoot of the Dominican Order;
and the Boni-Homines were a special division of the Predicant Friars.
It is a singular fact that from this one source of Dominicans or Black
Monks, sprang the best and the worst issues that ever emanated from
monachism--the Bonihomines and the Inquisition.

The Boni-Homines were, in a word, the Protestants of the Middle Ages.
And--a remarkable feature--they were not, like all other seceders,
persons who had separated themselves from the corruptions of Rome.  They
were better off, for they had never been tainted with them.  From the
first ages of primitive Christianity, while on all sides the stream was
gradually growing sluggish and turbid, in the little nest of valleys
between Dauphine and Piedmont it had flowed fresh and pure, fed by the
Word of God, which the Vaudois [Note 2] mountaineers suffered no Pope
nor Church to wrench or shut up from them.

The oldest name by which we know these early Protestants is Paulikians,
probably having a reference to the Apostle Paul as either the exponent
of their doctrines, or the actual founder of their local church.  A
little later we find them styled Cathari, or Pure Ones.  Then we come on
their third name of Albigenses, derived from the neighbouring town of
Alby, where a Council was held which condemned them.  But by whatever
name they are called they are the same people, living in the same
valleys, and holding unwaveringly and unadulterated the same faith.

It was by their fourth name of Boni-Homines, or Good Men, that they took
advantage of the preaching movement set up by the Dominicans in the
thirteenth century.  They permeated their ranks, however, very gradually
and quietly--perhaps all the more surely.  For shortly after the date of
this story, in the early part of the fourteenth century, it is said that
of every three Predicant Friars, two were Bonihomines.

The Boni-Homines were rife in France before they ever crept into
England; and the first man to introduce them into England was Edmund,
Earl of Cornwall.  A hundred years later, when the Boni-Homines had
shown what they really were, and the leaven with which they had
saturated society had evolved itself in Lollardism, the monks of other
Orders did their best to bring both the movement and the men into
disrepute, and to paint in the blackest colours the name of the Prince
who had first introduced them into this country.  In no monkish
chronicle, unless written by a Bonus Homo, will the name of Earl Edmund
be found recorded without some word of condemnation.  And the
Boni-Homines, unfortunately for history, were not much given to writing
chronicles.  Their business was saving souls.

Most important is it to remember, in forming just estimates of the
character of things--whether men or events--in the Middle Ages, that
with few exceptions monks were the only historians.  Before we can
truthfully set down this man as good, or that man as bad, we must,
therefore, consult other sources--the chronicles of those few writers
who were not monks, the State papers, but above all, where accessible,
the personal accounts and private letters of the individuals in
question.  It is pitiable to see well-meaning Protestant writers, even
in our _own_ day, repeating after each other the old monkish calumnies,
and never so much as pausing to inquire, Are these things so?

Late on the evening of the following day the Prior and monks of Ashridge
stood at the gate ready to receive their founder.  The circumstances of
his coming were unknown to them, and they were prepared to make it a
triumphal occasion.  But the first glance at his face altered all that.
The Prior quietly waved his monks back, and, going forward himself,
kissed his patron's hand, and led him silently into the monastery.

Poor Sir Reginald found himself condemned to all the sorrows he had
anticipated, down to the sorrel soup--for it was a vigil--and the straw
mattress, which, though considerably softer than the plank beds of the
monks, was barely endurable to his ease-loving limbs.  He looked as he
felt--extremely uncomfortable and exceedingly cross.

The Prior wasted no attentions on him.  Such troubles as these were not
worth a thought in his eyes; but his founder's face cost him many
thoughts.  He saw too plainly that for him had come one of those dread
hours in life when the floods of deep waters overflow a man, and unless
God take him into the ark of His covenant mercy, he will go down in the
current.  It was after some hours of prayer that the Prior tapped at the
door of the royal guest.

Earl Edmund's quiet voice bade him enter.

"How fares it with my Lord?"

"How is it likely to fare," was the sorrowful answer, "with one who hath
lost hope?"

The Prior sat down opposite his guest, where he might have the
opportunity of studying his countenance.  He was himself the senior of
the Earl, being a man of about sixty years--a man in whom there had been
a great deal of fire, and in whose dark, gleaming eyes there were many
sparks left yet.

"Father," said the Earl, in a low, pained voice, "I am perplexed to
understand God's dealings with me."

"Did you expect to understand them?" was the reply.

"Thus far I did--that I thought He would finish what He had begun.  But
all my life--so far as this earthly life is concerned--I have been
striving for one aim, and it has come to utter wreck.  I set one object
before me, and I thought--I _thought_ it was God's will that I should
pursue it.  If He, by some act of His own providence, had shown me the
contrary, I could have understood it better.  But He has let men step in
and spoil all.  It is not He, but they who have brought about this
wreck.  My barge is not shattered by the winds and waves of God, but
scuttled by the violence of pirates.  My life is spoiled, and I do not
understand why.  I have done nothing but what I thought He intended me
to do: I have set my heart on one thing, but it was a thing that I
believed He meant to give me.  It is all mystery to me."

"What is spoiled, my Lord?  Is it what God meant you to do, or what you
meant God to do?"

The sand grew to a larger heap in the hour-glass before another word was
spoken.

"Father," said the Prince at last, "have I been intent on following my
own will, when I thought I was pursuing the Lord's will for me?  Father
Bevis thinks so: he gave me some very hard words before I came here.  He
accuses me of idolatry; of loving the creature more than the Creator--
nay, of setting up my will and aim, and caring nothing for those of the
Lord.  In his eyes, I ought to have perceived years ago that God called
me to a life apart with Him, and to have detached my heart from all but
Himself and His Church.  Father, it is hard enough to realise the wreck
of all a man hoped and longed for: yet it is harder to know that the
very hope was sin, that the longing was contrary to the Divine purpose
for me.  Have I so misunderstood my life?  Have I so misunderstood my
Master?"

The expression of the Prior's eyes was very pitying and full of
tenderness.  Hard words were not what he thought needed as the medicine
for that patient.  They were only to be expected from Father Bevis, who
had never suffered the least pang of that description of pain.

"My Lord," answered the Prior, gently, "it is written of the wicked man,
`Thou hast removed Thy judgments from his eyes.'  They are not to be
seen nor fathomed by him.  And to a great extent it is equally true of
the righteous man.  Man must not look to be able to comprehend the ways
of God--they are above him.  It is enough for him if he can walk
submissively in them."

"I wonder," said the Earl, still pursuing his own train of thought, "if
I ought to have been a monk.  I never imagined it, for I never felt any
vocation.  It seemed to me that Providence called me to a life entirely
different.  Have I made an utter blunder all my life?  I cannot think
it."

"There is no need to think it, my Lord.  We cannot all be monks, even if
we would.  And why should we?  It might, perhaps, be better for you to
think one other thing."

"What?" asked the Earl, with more appearance of interest than he had
hitherto shown.

"That what you suppose to be the spoiling of your life is just what God
intended for you."

The Earl's face grew dark.  "What! that all my life long He was leading
me up to _this_?"

"It looks like it," said the Prior, quietly.

"Oh! but why?"

"Now, my Lord, you go beyond me.  Neither you nor I can guess that.  But
He knows."

"Yes, I suppose He knows."  But the consideration did not seem to
comfort him as it had done before when suggested by Father Bevis.

"Perhaps," said the Prior again, softly, "there was no other way for
your Lordship to the gate of the Holy City.  He leads us by diverse
ways; some through the flowery mead, and some over the desert sands
where no water is.  But of all it is written, `He led them forth by the
right way, that they might reach the haven of their desire.'  Would your
Lordship have preferred the mead and have missed the haven?"

"No," answered the Earl, firmly.

"Remember that you hold God's promise that when you awake up after His
likeness you shall be satisfied with it.  And he is not satisfied with
his purchase who accounts it to have cost more than it was worth."

"Will your figure hold if pressed further?" said the Earl, with a wintry
smile.  "The purchase may be worth a thousand marks, but if I have but
five hundred in the world I shall starve to death before the gem is
mine."

"No, my Lord, it will not hold.  For you cannot pay the price of that
gem.  The cost of it was His who will keep it safe for you, so that you
cannot fling it away in mistake or folly.  Figures must fail somewhere;
and we want another in this case.  My Lord, you are the gem, and the
heavenly Graver is fashioning on you the King's likeness.  Will you stay
His hand before it is perfect?"

"I would it were near perfection!" sighed the Earl.

"Perhaps it is," said the Prior, gently.  "Remember, it is your Father
who is graving it."

The Earl's lip quivered.  "If one could but know when it would be done!
If one might know that in seven years--ten years--it would be complete,
and one's heart and brain might find rest!  But to think of its going on
for twenty, thirty, forty--"

"They will look short enough, my Lord, when they are over."

"True.  But not while they are passing."

"Nay, `No chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous.'  Yet `faint
not when thou art rebuked of Him.'"

"It is the going on, that is so terrible!" said the Earl, almost under
his breath.  "If one might die when one's hope dies!  Father, do you
know anything of that?"

"In this world, my Lord, I dug a grave in mine own heart for all my
hopes, forty years ago."

"And can you look back on that time calmly?"

"That depends on what you mean by calmness.  Trustfully, yes;
indifferently, no."

"Yet the religious say that God requires their affections to be detached
from the world.  That must produce deadness of feeling."

"My Lord, there is such a thing as being alive from the dead.  That is
what God requires.  If we tarry at the dying, we shall stop short of His
perfection.  We are to be dead to sin; but I nowhere find in Scripture
that we are to die to love and happiness.  That is man's gloss upon
God's precept."

"Is that what you teach in your valleys?"

"We teach God's Word," said the Vaudois Prior.  "Alas! for the men that
have made it void through their tradition!  `If they speak not according
thereunto, it is because there is no light in them.'"

"And you learn--" suggested the Earl in a more interested tone.

"We learn that God requires of His servants that they shall overcome the
world; and He has told us what He means by the world--`The lust of the
flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life.'  Whatever has
become that to me, that am I to overcome, if I would reign with Christ
when He cometh."

We Protestants can hardly understand the fearful extent to which Rome
binds the souls of her votaries.  When she goes so far--which she rarely
does--as to hold out God's Word with one hand, she carries in the other
an antidote to it which she calls the interpretation of the Church,
derived from the consent of the Fathers.  That the Fathers scarcely ever
consent to anything does not trouble her.  According to this
interpretation, all human affection comes for monk or nun under the head
of the lusts of the flesh.  [Note 3.] A daughter's love for her mother,
a father's for his child, is thus branded.  From his cradle Earl Edmund
had been taught this; was it any marvel if he found it impossible to get
rid of the idea?  The Prior's eyes were less blinded.  He had come
straight from those Piedmontese valleys where, from time immemorial, the
Word of God has not been bound, and whosoever would has been free to
slake his thirst at the pure fountain of the water of life.  Love was
not dead in his heart, and he was not ashamed of it.

"But then, Father, you must reckon all love a thing to be left behind?"
very naturally queried the Earl.

"It will not be so in Heaven," answered the Prior; "then why should it
be on earth?  Left behind!  Think you I left behind me the one love of
my life when I became a Bonus Homo?  I trow not.  My Lord, forty years
ago this summer, I was a young man, just entering life, and betrothed to
a maiden of the Val Pellice.  God laid His hand upon my hopes of earthly
happiness, and said, `Not so!'  But must I, therefore, sweep my
Adelaide's memory out of my heart as if I had never loved her, and hold
it sin against God to bear her sweet face in tender remembrance?  Nay,
verily, I have not so learned Christ."

"What happened?" said the Earl.

"God sent His angels for her," answered the Prior in a low voice.

"Ah, but she loved you!" was the response, in a tone still lower.  The
Earl did not know how much, in those few words, he told the Prior of
Ashridge.

"My Lord," said the Prior, "did you ever purchase a gift for one you
loved, and keep it by you, carefully wrapped up, not letting him know
till the day came to produce it?"

The Earl looked up as if he did not see the object of the question; but
he answered in the affirmative.

"It may be," continued the Prior, "that God our Father does the same at
times.  I believe that many will find gifts on their Father's table, at
the great marriage-feast of the Lamb, which they never knew they were to
have, and some which they fancied were lost irrevocably on earth.  And
if there be anything for which our hearts cry out that is not waiting
for us, surely He can and will still the craving."

The Prior scarcely realised the effect of his words.  He saw afterwards
that the most painful part of the Earl's grief was lightened, that the
terrible strain was gone from his eyes.  He thanked God and took
courage.  He did not know that he had, to some extent, given him back
the most precious thing he had lost--hope.  He had only moved it further
off--from earth to Heaven; and, if more distant, yet it was safer there.

The Prior left the Earl alone after that interview--alone with the
Evangelisterium and the Psalter.  The words of God were better for him
than any words of men.

He stayed at Ashridge for about a fortnight, and then, to the ecstasy of
Sir Reginald, issued orders for return to Berkhamsted.  Only a few words
passed between the Prior and his patron as they took leave of each other
at the gate.

"Farewell, Father, and many thanks.  You have done me good--as much good
as man can do me now."

"My Lord, that acknowledgment is trust money, which I will pay into the
treasury of your Lord and mine."

So they parted, to meet only once again.  The Vaudois Prior was to go
down with his friend to the river-side, to the last point where man can
go with man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  "Je vais seul avec mon Dieu souffrir ma passion."--Bonnivard,
Prior of Saint Victor.

Note 2.  Vaudois is not really an accurate epithet, since the
"Valley-Men" only acquired it when, in after years, ejected, from their
old home, they sought shelter in the Pays de Vaud.  But it has come to
be regarded as a name expressive of certain doctrines.

Note 3.  "They (the Jesuits) were cut off from family and friends.
Their vow taught them to forget their father's house, and to esteem
themselves holy only when every affection and desire which nature had
planted in their breasts had been plucked up by the roots."
(_Jesuitism_, by the Reverend J.A. Wylie, Ll.D.)  This statement is
simply a shade less true of the other monastic orders.



CHAPTER TEN.

FORGIVENESS NOT TO BE FORGIVEN.

  "Ay, there's a blank at my right hand
  That ne'er can be made up to me."--_James Hogg_.

Before leaving Bermondsey, the Earl had accomplished one of the hardest
pieces of work which ever fell to his lot.  This was the execution of
the deed of separation which conveyed his legal assent to the departure
of his wife, and assigned to her certain lands for her separate
sustenance.  Himself the richest man in England, he was determined that
she should remain the wealthiest woman.  He assigned to her all his
lands in Norfolk and Suffolk, the manors of Kirketon in Lincolnshire,
Malmesbury and Wyntreslawe in Wiltshire, and an annuity on Queenhithe,
Middlesex--the whole sum amounting to 800 pounds per annum, which was
equivalent to at least 15,000 pounds a year.  He reserved to himself the
appointments to all priories and churches, and the military feofs and
escheats.  Moreover, the Countess was not to sell any of the lands, nor
had she the right to build castles.  So far, in all probability, any man
would have gone.  But one other item was added, which came straight from
the human heart of Earl Edmund, and was in the thirteenth century a very
strange item indeed.  The Countess, it was expressly provided, should
not waste, exile, enslave, nor destroy "the serfs on these estates."
[Note 1.]

The soul of Haman the Agagite, which had descended upon Margaret de
Clare, fiercely resented this unusual clause.  On the same roll which
contains the Earl's grant, in ordinary legal language--which must have
cost him something where he records her wish, and his assent, "freely
_during her widowhood_ to dedicate herself to the service of God,"--
there is another document, in very extraordinary language, wherein the
Lady Margaret recounts the wrongs which her lord is doing her in respect
of this 800 pounds a year.  A more spiteful production was hardly ever
penned.  From the opening address "to all who shall read or hear this
document" to the concluding assertion that she has hereto set her seal,
the indenture is crammed full of envy, hatred, and malice, and all
uncharitableness.  She lets it plainly be seen that all the lands in
Norfolk and Suffolk avail her nothing, so long as these restraining
clauses are added to the grant.  Margaret probably thought that she was
merely detailing her wrongs; she did not realise that she was exhibiting
her character.  But for these four documents, the two letters, and the
two indentures, wherein Earl and Countess have respectively "pressed
their souls on paper," we might never have known which was to blame in
the matter.  Out of her own mouth is Margaret judged.

With amazing effrontery, and in flat contradiction not only of her
husband's assertion, but of her own admission, the Countess commenced
her tirade by bringing against her lord the charge of which she herself
was guilty.  As he was much the more worthy of credit, I prefer to
believe him, confirmed as his statement is by her own letter to the
Pope.  She went on to detail the terms of separation, making the most of
everything against her husband, and wound up with a sentence which must
have pierced his heart like a poignard.  She solemnly promised never to
aggrieve him at any time by asking him to take her back, and never to
seek absolution [Note 2] from that oath!  In one sentence of cold,
cruel, concentrated spite, she sarcastically swore never to demand from
him the love for which during one and twenty years he had sued to her in
vain.

So now all was over between them.  The worst that could come had come.

  "All was ended now, the hope, and the fear, and the sorrow,
  All the aching heart, the restless unsatisfied longing,
  All the dull deep pain, and constant anguish of patience!"

There was no more left to fear, for there was nothing left to hope.

The Countess, attended by Father Miles and Felicia, left Rochester in
June for Romsey Abbey, where she solemnly assumed the veil of a black
nun.  She was now plain Sister Margaret, and in due course of time and
promotion, she would become Mother Margaret, and then, perhaps, Prioress
and Abbess.  And then--her soul would be required of her.

Mother Margaret!  What bitter mockery of a title for the woman who had
deliberately flung away from her as a worthless weed the white flower of
love which she might have cherished!

Of course, the household was now scattered.  Ada had been received into
the household of the Countess of Gloucester, the King's daughter Joan.
Olympias was pining to return to Reginald, if she could form some idea
in what part of the world he might be found; Clarice was awaiting her
imperious lord's commands.  The morning after the Countess had taken her
last farewell of them all, as they were still in this attitude of doubt
and expectation, in walked Sir Lambert Aylmer.  He was greeted with
delight.  Roisia was well, he reported, and sent her loving
commendations to all; but the object of his coming was not to talk about
Roisia.  The Earl, with Sir Reginald, was at Restormel, one of his
Cornish castles; but in a letter received from the latter gentleman, Sir
Lambert had been requested to inform Olympias that their master desired
them all to repair to Berkhamsted, whither he meant to come shortly, and
they should then hear his intentions for the future.

"The saints send he mean not to be a monk!" said Olympias, shrugging her
shoulders.

But nothing was further from Earl Edmund's purpose.

They reached Berkhamsted in a day or two, and to Clarice's great
delight, found there not only Mistress Underdone and the two
bower-maidens, but Sir Ademar and Heliet.  It was a new and pleasant
discovery that Heliet could travel.  It had been a sort of accepted
idea, never investigated, that her leaving Oakham was an impossibility;
but Ademar had coaxed her to try, and Heliet was quite willing.  The
result was that she had reached Berkhamsted in safety, to her own
intense enjoyment; for she had never before been a mile from Oakham, and
the discovery that she was no longer a fixture, but could accompany her
husband wherever duty called him was to Heliet unspeakable delight.

It was not till October that the Earl reached home; for he stayed at
Bristol for the wedding of the eldest princess, Alianora, with Henri
Duke of Barre, which took place on the twentieth of September.  The
morning after his arrival he desired to speak with the whole of his
household, who were to assemble in the hall for that purpose.

Olympias was positive that her master was about to take the cowl.  "And
it would be so nice, you see," she said; "just a match to the Lady."

"Nice, indeed!" said Reginald, pulling a terrible face.  "Thou hast not
spent a fortnight at Ashridge."

"Well, but he would not want to make a monk of thee," answered Olympias,
rather blankly.

"He would not manage it, if he tried," responded her lord and master.

When the Earl's intentions were stated, it appeared that he had no
further occasion for the services of Sir Reginald and Olympias, and he
had secured for them situations, if they chose to accept them, in the
household of the royal bride.  Olympias was in ecstasies; to live in
France was a most delicious fate in her eyes, nor did Reginald in the
least object to it.  Filomena and Sabina were provided for with the
Countess of Lincoln and the Princess Elizabeth, Mistress Underdone,
Heliet, and Sir Ademar would remain at Berkhamsted.  And then the Earl,
turning to Vivian and Clarice, requested as a favour to himself that
they would remain also.  It was necessary to have a lady of rank--
namely, a knight's wife--at the head of the establishment.  The Earl had
no sister who could take that position; and his brother's widow, the
Lady Constance d'Almayne, had preferred to return to her own home in
Bearn rather than live in England.  Heliet might have answered, but the
Earl felt, with his usual considerate gentleness, that her lameness
would make it a great charge and trouble to her.  He wished Clarice to
take it, if her husband would allow her, and was willing to continue in
his service.

"And, truth to tell," said the Earl, with a sad smile at Rosie, who was
making frantic efforts to compass the fearful distance of three yards
between the Earl's chair and Clarice's outstretched hand, "you have here
a jewel which I were very loth to lose from my empty casket.  So, Sir
Vivian, what say you?"

What became of either Clarice or Rosie was a matter of very little
importance to Vivian, for he considered them both in the light of
encumbrances--which was rather hard on Clarice at least, as she would
thankfully have got out of his way if duty had allowed it.  But, as he
had once said, he knew when he was well off, and he had no wish to pass
into the service either of a meaner nobleman or of a harder master.
Vivian assented without a qualifying word.

Thus, with Clarice, life sank back into its old groove, and time sped
on, uneventful except for the two items that every day little Rosie grew
in intelligence and attractiveness, and every month, as it seemed to her
mother, the Earl grew a year older.  Clarice doubted if Rosie were not
his sole tie to life.  She became his chief companion, and on the little
child who was no kin of his he poured out all the rich treasure of that
warm great heart which his own held at so small a value.  Rosie,
however, was by no means irresponsive.  Any one seeing her would have
taken the Earl to be her father, and Sir Vivian a stranger of whom she
was rather frightened.

The year 1294 was signalised by a remarkable action on the part of King
Edward.  In order to defray the vast expenses of his Welsh and Breton
wars, he took into his own hands all the priories in England, committing
their lands and goods to the care of state officials, and allowing
eighteenpence per week for the sustenance of each monk.  The allowance
was handsome, but the proceeding was very like burglary.

The exact religious position of Edward the First is not so easy to
define as that of some other monarchs.  With respect to any personal and
spiritual religion, it is, alas! only too easy.  But it is difficult to
say how far his opposition to the Pope originated from a deliberate
policy, well thought out beforehand, and how far from the momentary
irritation of a crossed will.  He certainly was not the intelligent
supporter of the Boni-Homines from personal conviction, that was to be
found in his son, Edward the Second, or in his cousin, Edmund, Earl of
Cornwall.  Yet he did support them to a certain extent, though more in
the earlier part of his life than in the later.  Like many another man
in his position, he was ready enough to assist a body of sensible
literary reformers, but, when the doctrine which they held began to
press personally on himself, he shrank from the touch of Ithuriel's
spear.  That his subjects should be made better and more obedient by
means of the Decalogue, or any other code, was a most excellent thing;
but when the Decalogue came closer and said, "Thou shalt not," to
himself, then it was an intrusive nuisance.

In the following year, 1295, the King laid the foundation of borough
representation, by directing the sheriffs of the various counties to
send to Parliament, along with the knights of the shire, two deputies
from each borough, who were to be elected by the townsmen, and empowered
to consent, in the name of their constituents, to the decrees of the
King and his Council.  "It is a most equitable rule," added the Monarch,
"that what concerns all should be judged of by all."  Concerning the
possibility of these members dissenting from his decrees, however, His
Majesty was not quite so eloquent.  That contingency was one which a
sovereign in the thirteenth century could scarcely be expected to take
into his august consideration.

But King Edward wanted more money, and apparently preferred to grind it
out of his monks rather than his peasants.  He now instituted a search
of all the monasteries in England, and commanded the confiscation of all
cash.  The monasteries resisting the excessive taxation laid upon them,
the King seized their lay fees.

In the December of this year, Earl Edmund left Berkhamsted for Cornwall,
taking with him Vivian, and leaving Ademar behind as the only gentleman
in the party.  He was going on an errand unpleasant to himself, for the
King had committed to his charge a portion of the Gascon army.  War and
contention were altogether out of his line, yet he had no choice but to
obey.  He joined his cousin, the Earl of Lancaster, and the Earl of
Lincoln, in Cornwall, and together they sailed on the fifteenth of
January 1296, from a Cornish port termed Plumhupe in the "Chronicle of
Worcester," but not easy to identify now, unless it be taken as a
blunder for Plymouth, and the chronicler be supposed ignorant of its
county.  With them were twenty-five barons and a thousand knights.

During the absence of the Earl, it struck his cousin, the King--for no
other reason can be guessed--that the Earl's treasury being much better
filled than his own, he might reasonably pay his debts out of his
cousin's overflowing coffers.  Accordingly he sent to Berkhamsted, much
to the dismay of the household, and coolly annexed his cousin's
valuables to the Crown.  But Earl Edmund was a man in whose eyes gold
was of comparatively small value, partly because he set other things
much higher, and partly because he had always had so much of it, that
poverty was a trouble which he was scarcely able to realise.

A sad year was 1296 to the royal family of England.  The Gascon
expedition proved so disastrous, that Edmund, Earl of Lancaster, died of
grief and disappointment at Bayonne on the fifth of June; and the
Scottish one, though brilliantly successful in a political light, cost
no less, for an arrow shot at a venture, at the siege of Berwick,
quenched the young life of Richard Plantagenet, the only brother and
last near relation of Edmund, Earl of Cornwall.  The triumphant capture
of the coronation chair and the Stone of Destiny and their removal from
Dunstaffnage to England, was contrasted with a terrible famine, which so
affected the vines in particular, that there was hardly wine enough left
for mass.

In the midst of these sharp contrasts of triumph and sorrow, Earl Edmund
returned to England, escorting his widowed cousin Queen Blanche, and
following the coffin of the Earl of Lancaster.  They found the King
earnestly engaged in effecting a contract of marriage between the young
Prince Edward and a daughter of Guy, Count of Flanders, and binding
himself to march to Guy's assistance against the King of France.

Ah, had it been God's will that the wife destined for Edward the Second
should have been the pure, high-minded, heroic Philippine of Flanders,
instead of the she-wolf of France, what a different history he would
have had!

For among all the princesses of the thirteenth century one of the
fairest souls is this Flemish maiden, who literally laid down her life
in ransom for her father.  It was not Prince Edward's fault that
Philippine was not Queen of England.  It was the fault of the ambitious
policy alike of King Edward and the King of France, and perhaps still
more of his Navarrese Queen.  They did not know that they were
sacrificing not only Philippine, but Edward.  Would they have cared much
about it if they had done?

The regalia of Scotland were solemnly offered at the shrine of Saint
Edward on the 17th of June.  Earl Edmund was present at the ceremony,
and after it, "weary with the storms of earth," he went home to court
repose at Berkhamsted.

It was the day after he came home, a soft, warm June day.  Clarice and
Heliet were playing with Rosie, now a bright, lively little child of
five years old.  In rushing away from Heliet, who was pretending to
catch her, Rosie, to the dismay of all parties, ran straight against her
father, who had just reached the top of the spiral staircase which led
to their own rooms.  Vivian, never very amiable when his course was
impeded, either by a physical or a moral hindrance, impatiently pushed
the child on one side.  It was the wrong side.  Rosie struggled to
recover her balance for one moment, during which her father's hand
_might_ have grasped her, had he been quick to do it; her mother had not
time to reach her.  Then, with an inarticulate cry for help, she went
down the well of the staircase.

Past Heliet's exclamation of horror came a sharp ringing shriek--"O
Vivian!  Rosie!" and darting by her astounded husband, down the stairs
fled Clarice, with a celerity that she would have thought impossible an
hour before.

Vivian's state of mind was a mixture of selfishness and horror.  He had
not intended to hurt the child, merely to get her out of his way; but
when selfishness and remorse struggle together, the worse of the two
usually comes to the front.  Vivian's first articulate answer was a
growl at his wife.

"Why did you not keep her out of my way?  Gramercy, what a fuss about a
girl!"

Then he read his guilt in Heliet's eyes, and began faltering out excuses
and asseverations that he had not meant anything.

Clarice reached the foot of the stairs without heeding a word he said.
But other hands, as tender as her own, were there before her.

"Little Rosie! my poor little child!" came from Earl Edmund's gentle
lips, as he lifted the bruised child in his arms.  Tenderly as it was
done, Rosie could not repress a moan of pain which went to the two
hearts that loved her.

She was not killed, but she was dying.

"A few hours," said the Earl's physician, instantly summoned, "a few
hours.  There was nothing to be done.  She would very likely not suffer
much--would hardly be conscious of pain until the end came."

The Earl bore her into his own chamber, and laid her on his bed.  With
speechless agony Clarice watched beside her.

Just once Rosie spoke.

"Mother, Mother, don't cry!"

Clarice was shedding no tears; they would not come yet; but in Rosie's
eyes her strained white face was an equivalent.

"Mother, don't cry," said Rosie.  "You said--I asked you--why people
died.  You said our Lord called them.  Must go--when our Lord calls."

Clarice was not able to answer; but Rosie's words struck cold to her
heart.

"Must go when our Lord calls!"

She could hardly pray.  What went up was not prayer, but rather a wild,
passionate cry that this thing could not be--should not be.

There were those few hours of half-consciousness, and then, just at the
turn of the night, the Lord came and called, and Rosie heard His voice,
and went to Him.

Sir Vivian Barkeworth, during that day and night, was not pursuing the
even tenor of his way in that state of complacent self-approval which
was the usual attitude of his mind.  It was not that he mourned the
child; his affections were at all times of a microscopic character, and
the only spark of regard which he entertained for Rosie was not as his
little child, but as his future heiress.  Nor was he at all troubled by
the sufferings of Clarice.  Women were always crying about something;
they were decided hindrances and vexations in a man's way; in fact, the
existence of women at all, except to see to a man's comforts, and amuse
his leisure, was, in Sir Vivian's eyes, an unfortunate mistake in the
arrangements of Providence.  He mourned first the good opinion which
people had of him, and which, by the way, was a much smaller package
than Sir Vivian thought it; and secondly, the far more important
disturbance of the excellent opinion which he had of himself.  He could
not rid himself of the unpleasant conviction that a little more patience
and amiability on his part would have prevented all this disagreeable
affair, though he would not for the world have acknowledged this
conviction to Clarice.  That was what he thought it--a disagreeable
affair.  It was the purest accident, he said to himself, and might have
happened to any one.  At the same time, something, which did not often
trouble Vivian, deep down in his inner man, distinctly told him that
such an accident would never have happened to the Earl or Sir Ademar.
Vivian only growled at his conscience when it gave him that faint prick.
He was so accustomed to bid it be quiet, that it had almost ceased to
give him any hints, and the pricking was very slight.

"A disagreeable business!" he said, inwardly; "a most disagreeable
business.  Why did not Clarice attend to her duties better?  It was her
duty to keep that child from bothering me.  What are women good for but
to keep their children out of mischief, and to see that their husbands'
paths through life are free from every thorn and pebble?"

Sir Vivian had reached this point when one of the Earl's pages brought
him a message.  His master wished his attendance in his private
sitting-room.  Vivian inwardly anathematised the Earl, the page, Heliet
(as a witness), Rosie (as the offender), but above all, as the head and
front of all his misery, Clarice.  He was not the less disposed to
anathemas when he found Sir Ademar, Heliet, Clarice, and Master Franco,
the physician, assembled to receive him with the Earl.  It rasped him
further to perceive that they were all exceedingly grave, though how he
could have expected any of them to look hilarious it would be difficult
to say.  Especially he resented the look of desolate despair in
Clarice's eyes, and the physical exhaustion and mental agony written in
every line of her white face.  He would not have liked to admit that he
felt them all as so many trumpet-tongued accusers against him.

"I desired you all to assemble," said the Earl, in tones as gentle as
usual, but with an under-current of pain, "because I wish to inquire in
what manner our poor little darling met her death.  How came she to fall
down the staircase?"

He looked at Heliet, and she was the one to reply.

"It was an accident, my Lord, I think," she said.

"`You think?'  Is there some doubt, then?"

No one answered him but Ademar.  "Pardon me, my Lord; I was not
present."

"Then I ask one who was present.  Dame Heliet?"

"I hope there is no doubt, my Lord," answered Heliet.  "I should be
sorry to think so."

The bushy eyebrows, which were the only blemish to the handsome
Plantagenet face of the Earl, were lowered at this reply.

"What am I to understand by that?" he asked.  "Did the child throw
herself down of her own will?"

"Oh, no, my Lord, no!"

"Did any one push her down?"

Dead silence.

"Sir Ademar was not present.  Were you, Sir Vivian?"

Vivian, whose face was far more eloquent in this instance than his
tongue, muttered an affirmative.

"Then you can answer me.  Did any one push her down?"

Vivian's reply was unintelligible, being hardly articulate.

"Will you have the goodness to repeat that, if you please?" said his
master.

In Clarice's heart a terrible tempest had been raging.  Ought she not to
speak, and declare the fact of which she felt sure, that Vivian had not
been intentionally the murderer of his child? that whatever he might
have done, he had meant no more than simply to push her aside?
Conscientiousness strove hard with bitterness and revenge.  Why should
she go out of her way to shield the man who had been the misery of her
life from the just penalty which he deserved for having made that life
more desolate than ever?  She knew that her voice would be the most
potent there--that her vote would outweigh twenty others.  The pleading
of the bereaved mother in favour of the father of the dead child was
just what would make its way straight to the heart of his judge.
Clarice's own heart said passionately, No!  Rosie's dead face must stand
between him and her for ever.  But then upon her spirit's fever fell
calming words--words which she repeated every day of her life--words
which she had taught Rosie.

"Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors."

If God were to forgive her as she forgave Vivian, what would become of
her?  Would she ever see Rosie again?  And then a cry for help and
strength to do it went up beyond the stars.

The Earl was quietly waiting for the repetition of Vivian's answer.  It
came at last--the answer--not a repetition.

"Saint Mary love us, my Lord!  I never meant any harm."

"You never meant!" replied a stern voice, not at all like Earl Edmund's
gentle tones.  "Did you _do_ it?"

Before Vivian could reply, to every one's astonishment, and most of all
to his, Clarice threw herself down on her knees, and deprecatingly
kissed the hand which rested on the arm of her master's chair.

"Mercy, my good Lord, I entreat you!  It was a pure accident, and
nothing more.  I know Sir Vivian meant no more than to push the child
gently out of his way.  He did not calculate on the force he used.  It
was only an accident--he never thought of hurting her.  For the sake of
my dead darling, whom I know you loved, my gracious Lord, grant me mercy
for her father!"

The silence was broken for a moment only by Heliet's sobs.  The Earl had
covered his face with his hands.  Then he looked into Clarice's pleading
eyes, with eyes in which unshed tears were glistening.

"Dame Clarice," said Earl Edmund in his softest tone, "_you_ wish me to
grant Sir Vivian mercy?"

"I implore it of your Lordship, for His sake to whom my child is gone,
and hers."

The Earl's eyes went to Vivian, who stood looking the picture of guilt
and misery.

"You hear, Sir Vivian?  You are pardoned, but not for your sake.  Be it
yours to repay this generous heart."

The party dispersed in a few minutes.  But when Ademar and Heliet found
themselves alone, the former said--"Will he love her after this?"

"Love her!" returned Heliet.  "My dear husband, thou dost not know that
man.  He owes his life to her generosity, and he will never forgive her
for it."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  Rot. Pat., 22 Edward the First.

Note 2.  The language of this sentence is remarkable:--"Jeo ou nul autre
en moun noun purchace absolucion _ou de Apostoile ou de autre
souerein_."  (Rot. Pat., 22 Edward the First.)



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

THE SUN BREAKS OUT.

  "If from Thine ordeal's heated bars,
  Our feet are seamed with crimson scars,
  Thy will be done!"--Whittier.

Heliet's penetration had not deceived her.  The mean, narrow, withered
article which Vivian Barkeworth called his soul, was unable to pardon
Clarice for having shown herself morally so much his superior.  That his
wife should be better than himself was in his eyes an inversion of the
proper order of things.  And as of course it was impossible that he
should be to blame, why, it must be her fault Clarice found herself most
cruelly snubbed for days after her interference in behalf of her
graceless husband.  Not in public; for except in the one instance of
this examination, where his sense of shame and guilt had overcome him
for a moment, Vivian's company manners were faultless, and a surface
observer would have pronounced him a model husband.  Poor Clarice had
learned by experience that any restraint which Vivian put upon himself
when inwardly vexed, was sure to rebound on her devoted head in the form
of after suffering in private.

To Clarice herself the reaction came soon and severely.  On the evening
before Rosie's funeral, Heliet found her seated by the little bier in
the hall, gazing dreamily on the face of her lost darling, with dry eyes
and strained expression.  She sat down beside her.  Clarice took no
notice.  Heliet scarcely knew how to deal with her.  If something could
be said which would set the tears flowing it might save her great
suffering; yet to say the wrong thing might do more harm than good.  The
supper-bell rang before she had made up her mind.  As they rose Clarice
slipped her hand into Heliet's arm, and, to the surprise of the latter,
thanked her.

"For what?" said Heliet.

"For the only thing any one can do for me--for feeling with me."

After supper Clarice went up to her own rooms; but Heliet returned to
the hall where Rosie lay.  To her astonishment, she found a sudden and
touching change in the surroundings of the dead child.  Rosie lay now
wreathed round in white rosebuds, tastefully disposed, as by a hand
which had grudged neither love nor labour.

"Who has done this?"  Heliet spoke aloud in he surprise.

"I have," said a voice beside her.  It was no voice which Heliet knew.
She looked up into the face of a tall man, with dark hair and beard, and
eyes which were at once sad and compassionate.

"You!  Who are you?" asked Heliet in the same tone.

"You may not know my name.  I am--Piers Ingham."

"Then I do know," replied Heliet, gravely.  "But, Sir Piers, _she_ must
not know."

"Certainly not," he said, quietly.  "Tell her nothing; let her think, if
she will, that the angels did it.  And--tell me nothing.  Farewell."

He stooped down and kissed the cold white brow of the dead child.

"That can hurt no one," said Piers, in a low voice.  "And she may be
glad to hear it--when she meets the child again."

He glided out of the hall so softly that Heliet did not hear him go, and
only looked up and found herself alone.  She knelt for a few minutes by
the bier and then went quietly to her own room.

The next morning there were abundance of conjectures as to who could
have paid this tender and graceful tribute.  The Earl was generally
suspected, but he at once said that it was no doing of his.  Everybody
was asked, and all denied it.  Father Bevis was appealed to, as being
better acquainted with the saints than the rest of the company, to state
whether he thought it probable that one of them had been the agent.  But
Father Bevis's strong common sense declined to credit any but human
hands with the deed.

Clarice was one of the last to appear.  And when the sweet, fair tribute
to her darling broke suddenly upon her sight, the result was attained
for which all had been more or less hoping.  That touch of nature set
the floodgates open, and dropping on her knees beside the bier, Clarice
poured forth a rain of passionate tears.

When all was over, and Rosie had been hidden away from sight until the
angel-trump should call her, Clarice and Heliet went out together on the
Castle green.  They sat down on one of the seats in an embrasure.  The
Earl, with his thoughtful kindness, seeing them, sent word to the
commandant to keep the soldiers within so long as the ladies chose to
stay there.  So they were left undisturbed.

Heliet was longing intensely to comfort Clarice, but she felt entirely
at a loss what line to take.  Clarice relieved her perplexity by being
the first to speak.

"Heliet!" she said, "what does God mean by this?"

"I cannot tell, dear heart, except that He means love and mercy.  `All
the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth unto the lovers of His will and
testimony.'  Is not that enough?"

"It might be if one could see it."

"Is it not enough, without seeing?"

"O Heliet, Heliet, she was all I had!"

"I know it, beloved.  But how if He would have thee to make Him all thou
hast?"

"Could I not have loved God and have had Rosie?"

"Perhaps not," said Heliet, gently.

"I hope He will take me soon," said Clarice.  "Surely He can never leave
me long now!"

"Or, it may be, make thee content to wait His will."

Clarice shook her head, not so much with a negative air as with a
shrinking one.  Just in that first agony, to be content with it seemed
beyond human nature.

Heliet laid her hand on that of her friend.  "Dear, would you have had
Rosie suffer as you have done?"

For a moment Clarice's mental eyes ran forward, over what would most
likely, according to human prevision, have been the course of Rosie's
after life.  The thought came to her as with a pang, and grew upon her,
that the future could have had no easy lot in store for Vivian
Barkeworth's daughter.  He would have disposed of her without a thought
of her own wish, and no prayers nor tears from her would have availed to
turn him from his purpose.  No--it was well with the child.

"Thou art right," she said, in a pained voice.  "It is better for Rosie
as it is.  But for me?"

"Leave that with God.  He will show thee some day that it was better for
thee too."

Clarice rose from her seat; but not till she had said the one thing
which Heliet had been hoping that she would not say.

"Who could have laid those flowers there?  Heliet, canst thou form any
idea?  Dost thou think it _was_ an angel?"

Heliet had an excuse in settling her crutches for delaying her reply for
a moment.  Then she said in a low tone, the source of whose tenderness
it was well that Clarice could not guess--"I am not sure, dear, that it
was not."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

If Clarice's sufferings had been passive before, they began to be active
now.  Vivian made her life a torment to her by jealousy on the one hand,
and positive cruelty on the other; yet his manners in public were so
carefully veiled in courtesy that not one of her friends guessed how
much she really suffered.  As much time as she could she spent in her
oratory, which was the only place where Vivian left her at peace, under
a vague idea that it would bring him ill luck to interrupt any one's
prayers.  Unfortunately for Clarice, he had caught a glimpse of Piers,
and, having no conscientiousness in his own composition, he could not
imagine it in that of another.  That Piers should be at Berkhamsted
without at least making an effort to open communication with Clarice,
was an idea which Vivian would have refused to entertain for a moment.
For what other earthly purpose could he be there?  Vivian was a man who
had no faith in any human being.  In his belief, the only possible means
to prevent Clarice from running away with Piers was to keep her either
in his sight or locked up when out of it.  The idea of trusting to her
principles would have struck him as simply ridiculous.

Sir Piers, however, had completely disappeared, as completely as though
he had never been seen.  And after a while Vivian grew more confident,
and not so particular about keeping the key turned.  Clarice knew
neither why he locked her in, nor why he gave over doing so.  Had she
had a suspicion of the reason, her indignation would not have been
small.

Public affairs meanwhile maintained their interest.  The King marched
his army to Scotland, and routed Wallace's troops in the battle of
Falkirk; but his success was somewhat counterbalanced by the burning of
Westminster Palace and Abbey before he left home.  It was about this
time that Piers Gavestone began to appear at Court, introduced by his
father with a view to making his fortune; and to the misfortune of the
young Prince Edward, their musical tastes being alike, they became fast
friends.  The Prince was now only fourteen years of age; and, led by
Gavestone, he was guilty--if indeed the charge be true--of a mischievous
boyish frolic, in "breaking the parks" of the Bishop of Chester, and
appropriating his deer.  The boy was fond of venison, and he was still
more fond of pets; but neither of these facts excused the raid on the
Bishop of Chester, who chose to take the offence far more seriously than
any modern bishop would be likely to do, and carried his complaint to
the King.  The royal father, as his wont was, flew into a passion, and
weighted the boys' frolic with the heavy penalty of banishment for
Gavestone, and imprisonment for the Prince.  In all probability young
Edward had never looked on his action in any other light than as a piece
of fun.  Had his father been concerned about the sin committed against
God--exactly the sin of a boy who robs an orchard--he might, with less
outward severity, have produced a far more wholesome impression on his
son; but what he considered appears to have been merely the dignity of
the Prince, which was outraged by the act of the boy who bore the title.
A quiet, grave exhortation might have done him good, but imprisonment
did none, and left on many minds the impression that the boy had been
hardly used.

One striking feature in the conduct of Edward the Second is the
remarkable meekness and submission with which he bore his father's angry
outbursts and severe punishments--often administered for mere youthful
follies, such as most fathers would think amply punished by a strong
lecture, and perhaps a few strokes of the cane.  Edward the First seems
to have been one of those men who entirely forget their own childhood,
and are never able in after life to enter into the feelings of a child.

His Majesty, however, had other matters to attend to beside the
provocation received from his heir; for in the month of September
following (1299) he was married at Canterbury to the Princess Marguerite
of France.  It was a case approaching that of Rachel and Leah, for it
was the beautiful Princess Blanche for whom the King had been in treaty,
and Marguerite was foisted on him by a process of crafty diplomacy not
far removed from treachery.  However, since Marguerite, though not so
fair as her sister, proved the better woman of the two, the King had no
reason to be disappointed in the end.

The Council of Regency established in Scotland, discontented with
Edward's arbitration, referred the question of their independence to the
Pope, and that wily potentate settled the matter in his own interests,
by declaring Scotland a fief of the Holy See.  The King was still
warring in that vicinity; the young Queen was left with her baby boy in
Yorkshire to await his return.

It was a hot July day, and Vivian, who highly disapproved of the
stagnation of Berkhamsted, declared his intention of going out to hunt.
People hunted in all weathers and seasons in the Middle Ages.  Ademar
declined to accompany him, and he contented himself by taking two of the
Earl's squires and a handful of archers as company.  The Earl did not
interfere with Vivian's proceedings.  He was quite aware that the quiet
which he loved was by no means to everybody's taste; and he left his
retinue at liberty to amuse themselves as they pleased.

Vivian did not think it necessary to turn the key on Clarice; but he
gave her a severe lecture on discreet behaviour which astonished her,
since her conscience did not accuse her of any breach of that virtue,
and she could not trace the course of her husband's thoughts.  Clarice
meekly promised to bear the recommendation in mind; and Vivian left her
to her own devices.

The day dragged heavily.  Mistress Underdone sat with Heliet and Clarice
at work; but not much work was gone through, for in everybody's opinion
it was too hot to do anything.  The tower in which they were was at the
back of the Castle, and looked upon the inner court.  The Earl's
apartments were in the next tower, and there, despite the heat, he was
going over sundry grants and indentures with Father Bevis and his
bailiff, always considering the comfort and advantage of his serfs and
tenants.  The sound of a horn outside warned the ladies that in all
probability Vivian was returning home; and whether his temper were good,
bad, or indifferent was likely to depend on the condition of his
hunting-bags.  Good, was almost too much to hope for.  With a little
smothered sigh Clarice ventured to hope that it might not be worse than
indifferent.  Her comfort for the next day or two would be much affected
by it.

They looked out of the window, but all they saw was Ademar crossing the
inner court with rapid steps, and disappearing within the Earl's tower.
There was some noise in the outer court, but no discernible solution of
it.  The ladies went back to their work.  Much to their surprise, ten
minutes later, the Earl himself entered the chamber.  It was not at all
his wont to come there.  When he had occasion to send orders to Clarice
concerning his household arrangements, he either sent for her or
conveyed them through Vivian.  These were the Countess's rooms which
they were now occupying, and the Earl had never crossed the threshold
since she left the Castle.

They looked up, and saw in his face that he had news to tell them.  And
all at once Clarice rose and exclaimed--"Vivian!"

"Dame, I grieve to tell you that your knight has been somewhat hurt in
his hunting."

Clarice was not conscious of any feeling but the necessity of knowing
all.  And that she had not yet been told all she felt certain.

"Much hurt?" she asked.

"I fear so," answered the Earl.

"My Lord, will you tell me all?"

The Earl took her hand and looked kindly at her.  "Dame, he is dead."

Mistress Underdone raised her hands with an exclamation of shocked
surprise, to which Heliet's look of horror formed a fitting corollary.
Clarice was conscious only of a confused medley of feelings, from which
none but a sense of amazement stood out in the foreground.  Then the
Earl quietly told her that, in leaping a wide ditch, Vivian had been
thrown from his horse, and had never spoken more.

No one tried to comfort Clarice.  Pitifully they all felt that comfort
was not wanted now.  The death of Rosie had been a crushing blow; but
Vivian's, however sudden, could hardly be otherwise than a relief.  The
only compassion that any one could feel was for him, for whom there
was--

  "No reckoning made, but sent to his account
  With all his imperfections on his head."

The very fact that she could not regret him on her own account lay a
weight on Clarice's conscience, though it was purely his own fault.
Severely as she tried to judge herself, she could recall no instance in
which, so far as such a thing can be said of any human sinner, she had
not done her duty by that dead man.  She had obeyed him in letter and
spirit, however distasteful it had often been to herself; she had
consulted his wishes before her own; she had even honestly tried to love
him, and he had made it impossible.  Now, she could not resist the
overwhelming consciousness that his death was to her a release from her
fetters--a coming out of prison.  She was free from the perpetual drag
of apprehension on the one hand, and of constantly endeavouring on the
other to please a man who was determined not to be pleased.  The spirit
of the uncaged bird awoke within her--a sense of freedom, and light, and
rest, such as she had not known for those eight weary years of her
married slavery.

Yet the future was no path of roses to the eyes of Clarice.  She was not
free in the thirteenth century, in the sense in which she would have
been free in the nineteenth, for she had no power to choose her own lot.
All widows were wards of the Crown; and it was not at all usual for the
Crown to concern its august self respecting their wishes, unless they
bought leave to comply with them at a very costly price.  By a singular
perversion of justice, the tax upon a widow who purchased permission to
remarry or not, at her pleasure, was far heavier than the fine exacted
from a man who married a ward of the Crown without royal licence.  The
natural result of this arrangement was that the ladies who were either
dowered widows or spinster heiresses very often contracted clandestine
marriages, and their husbands quietly endured the subsequent fine and
imprisonment, as unavoidable evils which were soon over, and well worth
the advantage which they purchased.

It seemed, however, as if blessings, no less than misfortunes, were not
to come single to Clarice Barkeworth.  A few weeks after Vivian's death,
the Earl silently put a parchment into her hand, which conveyed to her
the information that King Edward had granted to his well-beloved cousin,
Edmund, Earl of Cornwall, the marriage of Clarice, widow of Vivian
Barkeworth, knight, with the usual proviso that she was not to marry one
of the King's enemies.  This was, indeed, something for which to be
thankful.  Clarice knew that her future was as safe in her master's
hands as in her own.

"Ah!" said Heliet, when that remark was made to her, "if we could only
have felt, dear heart, that it was as safe in the hands of his Master!"

"Was I very faithless, Heliet?" said Clarice, with tears in her eyes.

"Dear heart, no more than I was!" was Heliet's answer.

"But has it not occurred to thee, Heliet, now--why might I not have had
Rosie?"

"I know not, dear Clarice, any more than Rosie knew, when she was a babe
in thine arms, why thou gavest her bitter medicine.  Oh, leave all that
alone--our Master understands what He is doing."

It was the middle of September, and about two months after Vivian's
death.  Clarice sat sewing, robed in the white weeds of widowhood, in
the room which she usually occupied in the Countess's tower.  The
garments worn by a widow were at this time extremely strict and very
unbecoming, though the period during which they were worn was much less
stringent than now.  From one to six months was as long as many widows
remained in that condition.  Heliet had not been seen for an hour or
more, and Mistress Underdone, with some barely intelligible remarks very
disparaging to "that Nell," who stood, under her, at the head of the
kitchen department, had disappeared to oversee the venison pasty.
Clarice was doing something which she had not done for eight years,
though hardly aware that she was doing it--humming a troubadour song.
Getting past an awkward place in her work, words as well as music became
audible--

  "And though my lot were hard and bare,
  And though my hopes were few,
  Yet would I dare one vow to swear
  My heart should still be true."

"Wouldst thou, Clarice?" asked a voice behind her.

Clarice's delicate embroidery got the worst of it, for it dropped in a
heap on the rushes, and nobody paid the slightest attention to it for a
considerable time.  Nor did any one come near the room until Heliet made
her appearance, and she came so slowly, and heralded her approach by
such emphatic raps of her crutches on the stone floor, that Clarice
could scarcely avoid the conclusion that she was a conspirator in the
plot.  The head and front of it all, however, was manifestly Earl
Edmund, who received Sir Piers with a smile and no other greeting--a
distinct intimation that it was not the first time they had met that
day.

The wedding--which nobody felt inclined to dispute--was fixed for the
fifteenth of October.  The Earl wished it to take place when he could be
present and give away the bride, and he wanted first a fortnight's
retreat at Ashridge, to which place he had arranged to go on the last
day of September.  Sir Piers stepped at once into his old position, but
the Earl took Ademar with him to Ashridge.  He gave the grant of
Clarice's marriage to Piers himself, in the presence of the household,
with the remark:--

"It will be better in your hands than mine; and there is no time like
the present."

Into Clarice's hand her master put a shining pile of gold for the
purchase of wedding garments and jewellery.

"I am glad," he said, "that your path through life is coming to the
roses now.  I would hope the thorns are over for you--at least for some
time.  There have been no roses for me; but I can rejoice, I hope, with
those for whom they blossom."

And so he rode away from Berkhamsted, looking back to smile a farewell
to Heliet and Clarice, as they stood watching him in the gateway.  Long
years afterwards they remembered that kind, almost affectionate, smile.

As the ladies turned into their own tower, and began to ascend the
staircase--always a slow process with Heliet--Clarice said, "I cannot
understand why our Lord the Earl has such a lonely and sorrowful lot."

"Thou wouldst like to understand everything, Clarice," returned Heliet,
smiling.

"I would!" she answered.  "I can understand my own troubles better, for
I know how much there is in me that needs setting right; but he--why he
is almost an angel already."

"Perhaps he would tell thee the same thing," said Heliet.  "I am afraid,
dear heart, if thou hadst the graving of our Lord's gems, thou wouldst
stop the tool before the portrait was in sufficient relief."

"But when the portrait _is_ in sufficient relief?" answered Clarice,
earnestly.

"Ah, dear heart!" said Heliet, "neither thine eyes nor mine are fine
enough to judge of that."

"It seems almost a shame to be happy when I know he is not," replied
Clarice, the tears springing to her eyes; "our dear master, who has been
to me as a very angel of God."

"Nay, dear, he would wish thee to be happy," gently remonstrated Heliet.
"I believe both thou and I are to him as daughters, Clarice."

"I wish I could make him happy!" said Clarice, as they turned into her
rooms.

"Ask God to do it," was Heliet's response.

They both asked Him that night.  And He heard and answered them, but, as
is often the case, not at all as they expected.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

IN THE CITY OF GOLD.

  "I am not eager, strong,
  Nor bold--all that is past;
  I am ready not to do,
  At last--at last.

  "My half-day's work is done,
  And this is all my part:
  I give a patient God
  My patient heart."

Vespers were over at Ashridge on the last day of September, the evening
of the Earl's arrival.  He sat in the guest-chamber, with the Prior and
his Buckinghamshire bailiff, to whom he was issuing instructions with
respect to some cottages to be built for the villeins on one of his
estates.  The Prior sat by in silence, while the Earl impressed on the
mind of his agent that the cottages were to be made reasonably
comfortable for the habitation of immortal souls and not improbably
suffering bodies.  When at last the bailiff had departed, the Prior
turned to his patron with a smile.  "I would all lay lords--and
spiritual ones too--were as kindly thoughtful of their inferiors as your
Lordship."

"Ah, how little one can do at the best!" said the Earl.  "Life is full
of miseries for these poor serfs; shall we, who would follow Christ's
steps, not strive to lighten it?"

"It is very truth," said the Prior.

"Ay, and how short the boundary is!" pursued the Earl.  "`Man is
ignorant what was before him; and what shall be after him, who can tell
him?'  It may be, the next lord of these lands will be a hard man, who
will oppress his serfs, or at any rate take no care for their comfort.
Poor souls! let them be happy as long as they can."

"When I last saw your Lordship, you seemed to think that short boundary
too long for your wishes."

"It is seven years since that," answered the Earl.  "It hardly seems so
far away now.  And lately, Father--I scarcely can tell how--I have
imagined that my life will not be long.  It makes me the more anxious to
do all I can ere `the night cometh in which no man can work.'"

The Prior looked critically and anxiously at his patron.  The seven
years which he had passed in sorrowful loneliness had aged him more than
seven years ought to have done.  He was not fifty yet, but he was
beginning to look like an old man.  The burden and heat of the day were
telling on him sadly.

"Right, my Lord," replied the Prior; "yet let me beg of your Lordship
not to over-weary yourself.  Your life is a precious thing to all
dependent on you, and not less to us, your poor bedesmen here."

"Ah, Father! is my life precious to any one?" was the response, with a
sad smile.

"Indeed it is," answered the Prior earnestly.  "As your Lordship has
just said, he who shall come after you may be harsh and unkind, and your
poor serfs may sorely feel the change.  No man has a right to throw away
life, my Lord, and you have much left to live for."

Perhaps the Earl had grown a little morbid.  Was it any wonder if he
had?  He shook his head.

"We have but one life," continued the Prior, "and it is our duty to make
the best of it--that is, to do God's will with it.  And when it is God's
will to say unto us, `Come up higher,' we may be sorry that we have
served Him no better, but not, I think, that we have given no more time
to our own ease, nor even to our own sorrows."

"And yet," said the Earl, resting his head upon one hand, "one gets
very, very tired sometimes of living."

"Cannot we trust our Father to call us to rest when we really need it?"
asked the Prior.  "Nor is it well that in looking onward to the future
glory we should miss the present rest to be had by coming to Him, and
casting all our cares and burdens at His feet."

"Does He always take them?"

"Always--if we give them.  But there is such a thing as asking Him to
take them, and holding them out to Him, and yet keeping fast hold of the
other end ourselves.  He will hardly take what we do not give."

The Earl looked earnestly into his friend's eyes.

"Father, I will confess that these seven years--nay! what am I saying?
these eight-and-twenty--I have not been willing that God should do His
will.  I wanted my will done.  For five-and-forty years, ever since I
could lisp the words, I have been saying to Him with my lips, _Fiat
voluntas tua_.  But only within the last few days have I really said to
Him in my heart, Lord, have Thy way.  It seemed to me--will you think it
very dreadful if I confess it?--that I wanted but one thing, and that it
was very hard of God not to let me have it.  I did not say such a thing
in words; I could talk fluently of being resigned to His will, but down
at the core of my heart I was resigned to everything but one, and I was
not resigned to that at all.  And I think I only became resigned when I
gave over trying and working at resignation, and sank down, like a tired
child, at my Father's feet.  But now I am very tired, and I would fain
that my Father would take me up in His arms."

The Prior did not speak.  He could not.  He only looked very sorrowfully
into the worn face of the heart-wearied man, with a conviction which he
was unable to repress, that the time of the call to come up higher was
not far away.  He would have been thankful to disprove his conclusion,
but to stifle it he dared not.

"I hope," said the Earl in the same low tone, "that there are quiet
corners in Heaven where weary men and women may lie down and rest a
while at our Lord's feet.  I feel unfit to take a place all at once in
the angelic choir.  Not unready to praise--I mean not that--only too
weary, just at first, to care for anything but rest."

There were tears burning under the Prior's eyelids; but he was silent
still.  That was not his idea of Heaven; but then he was less weary of
earth.  He felt almost vexed that the only passage of Scripture which
would come to him was one utterly unsuited to the occasion--"They rest
not day nor night."  Usually fluent and fervent, he was tongue-tied just
then.

"Did Christ our Lord need the rest of His three days and nights in the
grave?" suggested the Earl, thoughtfully.  "He must have been very weary
after the agony of His cross.  I think He must have been very tired of
His life altogether.  For was it not one passion from Bethlehem to
Calvary?  And He could hardly have been one of those strong men who
never seem to feel tired.  Twice we are told that He was weary--when He
sat on the well, and when He slept in the boat.  Father, I ought to ask
your pardon for speaking when I should listen, and seeming to teach
where I ought to be taught."

"Nay, my Lord, say not so, I pray you."  The Prior found his voice at
last.  "I have learned to recognise my Master's voice, whether I hear it
from the rostrum of the orator or from the lowly hovel of the serf.  And
it is not the first time that I have heard it in yours."

The Earl looked up with an expression of surprise, and then shook his
head again with a smile.

"Nay, good Father, flatter me not so far."

He might have added more, but the sound of an iron bar beaten on a
wooden board announced the hour of supper.  The Earl conversed almost
cheerfully with the Prior and his head officers during supper; and
Ademar remarked to the Cellarer that he had not for a long while seen
his master so like his old self.

The first of October rose clear and bright.  At Berkhamsted, the ladies
were spending the morning in examining the contents of a pedlar's
well-stocked pack, and buying silk, lawn, furs, and trimmings for the
wedding.  At Ashridge, the Earl was walking up and down the Priory
garden, looking over the dilapidations which time had wrought in his
monastery, and noting on his tables sundry items in respect of which he
meant to repair the ravages.  At Romsey, Mother Margaret, in her black
patched habit and up-turned sleeves, was washing out the convent
refectory, and thereby, she fervently hoped, washing her sins out of
existence--without a thought of the chivalrous love which would have set
her high above all such menial labour, and would never have permitted
even the winds of heaven to "visit her cheek too roughly."  Did it never
occur to her that she might have allowed the Redeemer of men to "make
her salvation" for her, and yet have allowed herself to make her
husband's life something better to him than a weary burden?

The day's work was over, and the recreation time had come.  The Prior of
Ashridge tapped at the door of the guest-chamber, and was desired to
enter.

He found the Earl turning over the leaves of his Psalter.

"Look here, Father," said the latter, pointing out the fifteenth verse
of the ninetieth Psalm.

"We are glad for the days wherein Thou didst humiliate us; the years
wherein we have seen evil."

"What does that mean?" said the Earl.  "Is it that we thank God for the
afflictions He has given us?  It surely does not mean--I hope not--that
our comfort is to last just as long as our afflictions have lasted, and
not a day longer."

"Ah, my Lord, God is no grudging giver," answered the Prior.  "The verse
before it, methinks, will reply to your Lordship--`we exult and are glad
all our days.'  All our earthly life have we been afflicted; all our
heavenly one shall we be made glad."

"Glad!  I hardly know what the word means," was the pathetic reply.

"You will know it then," said the Prior.

"You will--but shall I?  I have been such an unprofitable servant!"

"Nay, good my Lord, but are you going to win Heaven by your own works?"
eagerly demanded the Bonus Homo.  "`Beginning in the spirit, are ye
consummated in the flesh?'  Surely you have not so learned Christ.  Hath
He not said, `Life eternal give I to them; and they shall not perish for
ever, and none shall snatch them out of My hand'?"

"True," said the Earl, bowing his head.

But this was Vaudois teaching.  And though Earl Edmund, first of all men
in England, had drunk in the Vaudois doctrines, yet even in him they had
to struggle with a mass of previous teaching which required to be
unlearned--with all that rubbish of man's invention which Rome has built
up on the One Foundation.  It was hard, at times, to keep the old ghosts
from coming back, and troubling by their shadowy presence the soul whom
Christ had brought into His light.

There was silence for a time.  The Earl's head was bent forward upon his
clasped hands on the table, and the Prior, who thought that he might be
praying, forbore to disturb him.  At length he said, "My Lord, the
supper-hour is come."

The Earl gave no answer, and the Prior thought he had dropped asleep.
He waited till the board was struck with the iron bar as the signal for
supper.  Then he rose and addressed the Earl again.  The silence
distressed him now.  He laid his hand upon his patron's shoulder, but
there was no response.  Gently, with a sudden and terrible fear, he
lifted the bowed head and looked into his face.  And then he knew that
the weary heart was glad at last--that life eternal in His beatific
presence had God given to him.  From far and near the physicians were
summoned that night, but only to tell the Prior what he already knew.
They stood round the bed on which the corpse had been reverently laid,
and talked of his mysterious disease in hard words of sonorous Latin.
It would have been better had they called it in simple English what it
was--a broken heart.  Why such a fate was allotted to one of the best of
all our princes, He knows who came to bind up the broken-hearted, and
who said by the lips of His prophet, "Reproach hath broken mine heart."

Ademar was sent back to Berkhamsted with the woeful news.  There was
bitter mourning there.  It was not, perhaps, in many of the household,
unmixed with selfish considerations, for to a large proportion of them
the death of their master meant homelessness for the present, and to
nearly all sad apprehensions for the future.  Yet there was a great deal
that was not selfish, for the gentle, loving, humane, self-abnegating
spirit of the dead had made him very dear to all his dependants, and
more hearts wept for him than he would ever have believed possible.

But there was one person in especial to whom it was felt the news ought
to be sent.  The Prior despatched no meaner member of the Order, but
went himself to tell the dark tidings at Romsey.

He pleaded hard for a private interview with the Countess, but the
reigning Abbess of Romsey was a great stickler for rule, and she decided
that it was against precedent, and therefore propriety, that one of her
nuns should be thus singled out from the rest.  The announcement must be
made in the usual way, to the whole convent, at vespers.

So, in the well-known tones of the Prior of Ashridge,--some time the
Earl's confessor, and his frequent visitor,--with the customary request
to pray for the repose of the dead, to the ears of Mother Margaret, as
she knelt in her stall with the rest, came the sound of the familiar
name of Edmund, Earl of Cornwall.

Very tender and pathetic was the tone in which the intimation was given.
The heart of the Prior himself was so wrung that he could not imagine
such a feeling as indifference in that of the woman who had been the
dearest thing earth held for that dead man.  But if he looked down the
long row of black, silent figures for any sign or sound, he looked in
vain.  There was not even a trembling of Mother Margaret's black veil as
her voice rose untroubled in the response with all the rest--

  "_O Jesu dulcis!  O Jesu pie!
  O Jesu, Fili Maria!
  Dona eis requiem_."

In the recreation-time which followed, the Prior sought out Mother
Margaret.  He found her without difficulty, seated on a form at the side
of the room, talking to a sister nun, and he caught a few words of the
conversation as he approached.

"I assure thee, Sister Regina, it is quite a mistake.  Mother Wymarca
told me distinctly that the holy Mother gave Sister Maud an unpatched
habit, and it is all nonsense in her to say there was a patch on the
elbow."

The Prior bit his lips, but he restrained himself, and sat down,
reverently saluted by both nuns as he did so.  Was she trying to hide
her feelings? thought he.

"Sister Margaret, I brought you tidings," he said, as calmly as was in
him.

The nun turned upon him a pair of cold, steel-blue eyes, as calm and
irresponsive as if he had brought her no tidings whatever.

"I heard them, Father, if it please you.  Has he left any will?"

The priest-nature in the Prior compelled him officially to avoid any
reprehension of this perfect monastic calm; but the human nature, which
in his case lay beneath it, was surprised and repelled.

"He has left a will, wherein you are fully provided for."

"Oh, that is nice!" said Mother Margaret, in tones of unquestionable
gratulation.  "And how much am I to have?  Of course I care about it
only for the sake of the Abbey."

The Prior had his private ideas on that point; for, as he well knew, the
vow of poverty was somewhat of a formality in the Middle Ages, since the
nun who brought to her convent a title and a fortune was usually not
treated in the same manner as a penniless commoner.

"The customary dower to a widow, Sister."

"Do you mean to say I am only to have my third?  Well, I call that
shameful!  And so fond of me as he always professed to be!  I thought he
would have left me everything."

The Prior experienced a curious sensation in his right arm, which, had
Mother Margaret not been a woman, or had he been less of a Christian and
a Church dignitary, might have resulted in the measuring of her length
on the floor of the recreation-room.  But she was totally unconscious of
any such feeling on his part.  Her heart--or that within her which did
duty for one--had been touched at last.

"Well, I do call it disgraceful!" she repeated.

"And is that all?" asked the Prior involuntarily, and not by any means
in consonance with his duty as a holy priest addressing a veiled nun.
But priests and nuns have no business with hearts of any sort, and he
ought to have known this as well as she did.

"All?" she said, with a rather puzzled look in the frosty blue eyes.  "I
would it had been a larger sum, Father; for the convent's sake, of
course."

"And am I to hear no word of regret, Sister, for the man to whom you
were all the world?"

This was, of course, a most shocking speech, considering the speaker and
the person whom he addressed; but it came warm from that inconvenient
heart which had no business to be beneath the Prior's cassock.  Mother
Margaret was scandalised, and she showed it in her face, which awoke her
companion to the fact that he was not speaking in character.  That a
professed nun should be expected to feel personal and unspiritual
interest in an extern! and, as if that were not enough, in a man!
Mother Margaret's sense of decorum was quite outraged.

"How could such thoughts trouble the blessed peace of a holy sister?"
she wished to know.  "Pardon me, Father; I shall pray for his soul, of
course.  What could I do more?"

And the Prior recognised at last that to the one treasure of that dead
man's heart, the news he brought was less than it had been to him.

He bit his lips severely.  It was all he could do to keep from telling
her that the pure, meek, self-abnegating soul which had passed from
earth demanded far fewer prayers than the cold, hard, selfish spirit
which dwelt within her own black habit.

"It is I who require pardon, Sister," he said, in a constrained voice.
"May our Lord in His mercy forgive us all!"

He made no further attempt to converse with Mother Margaret.  But, as he
passed her a few minutes later, he heard that she and Sister Regina had
gone back to the previous subject, which they were discussing with some
interest in their tones.

"O woman, woman!" groaned the Prior, in his heart; "the patch on Sister
Maud's elbow is more to thee than all the love thou hast lost.  Ah, my
dear Lord! it is not you that I mourn.  You are far better hence."

From which speech it will be seen that the Bonus Homo was very far from
being a perfect monk.

The actions of Mother Margaret admirably matched her words.  She gave
herself heart and soul to the important business of securing her
miserable third of her dead lord's lands and goods.  Not till they were
safe in her possession did she allow herself any rest.

Did the day ever come when her feelings changed?  During the ten years
which she outlived the man who had loved her with every fibre of his
warm, great heart, did her heart ever turn regretfully, when Abbesses
were harsh or life was miserable, to the thought of that tender,
faithful love which, so far as in it lay, would have sheltered her life
from every breath of discomfort?  Did she ever in all those ten years
whisper to herself--

  "Oh, if he would but come again,
  I think I'd vex him so no more!"

Did she ever murmur such words as--

  "I was not worthy of you, Douglas,
  Not half worthy the like of you!"

...words which, honestly sobbed forth in very truth, would have been far
nearer real penitence than all the "acts of contrition" which passed her
lips day by day.

God knoweth.  Men will never know.  But all history and experience tend
to assure us that women such as Margaret de Clare usually die as they
have lived, and that of all barriers to penitence and conversion there
is none so hard to overthrow as indulged malice and deliberate hardening
of the heart against the love of God and man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

There was not, as Piers and Clarice had feared there might have been,
any misfortune to them in the way of preventing their marriage.  King
Edward had great respect for justice and honour, and finding that his
cousin had, though without legal formalities, granted Clarice's marriage
to Piers, he confirmed the grant, and Father Bevis married them quietly
in the chapel of Berkhamsted Castle, without any festivity or
rejoicings, for the embalmed body of the master to whom they owed so
much lay in state in the banquet-hall.  It was a mournful ceremony,
where--

  "The cheers that had erst made the welkin ring
  Were drowned in the tears that were shed for the King."

Clarice and Piers made no attempt to obtain any further promotion.  They
retired to a little estate in Derbyshire, which shortly afterwards fell
to Piers, and there they spent their lives, in serving their generation
according to the will of God, often brightened by visits from Ademar and
Heliet, who had taken up their abode not far from them in the
neighbouring county of Rutland.  And as time went on, around Clarice
grew up brave sons and fair daughters, to all of whom she made a very
loving mother; but, perhaps, no one was ever quite so dear to her heart
as the star which had gleamed on her life the brighter for the
surrounding darkness, the little white rosebud which had been gathered
for the garden of God.

  "In other springs her life might be
  In bannered bloom unfurled;
  But never, never match her wee
  White Rose of all the world."

It was not until the spring which followed his death was blooming into
green leaves and early flowers that the coffin of Edmund, Earl of
Cornwall, was borne to the magnificent Abbey of Hales in
Gloucestershire, founded by his father.  There they laid him down by
father and mother--the grand, generous, spendthrift Prince who had so
nearly borne the proud title of Caesar Augustus, and the fair, soft,
characterless Princess who had been crowned with him as Queen of the
Romans.  For the Prince who was laid beside them that Easter afternoon,
the world had prepared what it considers a splendid destiny.  Throne and
diadem, glory and wealth, love and happiness, were to have been his, so
far as it lay in the world's power to give them; but on most of all
these God had laid His hand, and forbidden them to come near the soul
which He had marked for His own.  For him there was to be an
incorruptible crown, but no corruptible; the love of the Lord that
bought him, but not the love of the woman on whom he set his heart.
Now--whatever he may have thought on earth--now, standing on the sea of
glass, and having the harp of God, he knows which was the better
portion.

He wore no crown; he founded no dynasty; he passed away, like a name
written in water, followed only by the personal love of a few hearts
which were soon dust like him, and by the undying curses and calumnies
of the Church which he had done his best to purify against her will.
But shall we, looking back across the six centuries which lie between us
and him who brought Protestantism into England--shall we write on his
gravestone in the ruined Abbey of Hales, "This man lived in vain?"

THE END.








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A FORGOTTEN HERO; OR, NOT FOR HIM ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Bible Characters
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Bible Characters

Author: Dwight Lyman Moody
        Joseph Parker
        T. De Witt Talmage

Author of introduction, etc.: C. B. Gillette


        
Release date: May 17, 2017 [eBook #54736]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/54736

Credits: Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIBLE CHARACTERS ***

BIBLE CHARACTERS




[Illustration: THE EXPULSION FROM THE GARDEN.

From the Painting by Gustave Dore]




                            BIBLE CHARACTERS

                DESCRIBED AND ANALYZED IN THE SERMONS AND
                             WRITINGS OF THE
                        FOLLOWING FAMOUS AUTHORS:

                           Dwight Lyman Moody.
                           T. De Witt Talmage.
                             Joseph Parker.

              SUPPLEMENTED BY THE GREATEST POEMS IN PRINT.

                             [Illustration]

                                CHICAGO:
                  THOS. W. JACKSON PUBLISHING COMPANY.

     Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1902, by the
                   RHODES & McCLURE PUBLISHING COMPANY
      in the Office of the Librarian of Congress, Washington, D. C.

                          All Rights Reserved.




INTRODUCTION.

BY THE REV. C. B. GILLETTE, PH. D.


It frequently occurs to the devout Bible student and to the earnest
Christian that, if he could have had the personal acquaintance of Jesus,
and other Bible characters, it would have helped materially in the
cultivation of a religious and spiritual life. One feels that, if he
could have been a James, or a John, a Martha, or a Mary; if he could
have stood by Jesus himself, and listened to the words falling from His
lips: observed his life, become acquainted with his thought, and felt
that silent, subtle influence emanating from his personality; such would
have been potential factors, aiding one onward and upward in the divine
pathway.

So also, but in lesser degree, one regrets the impossibility of personal
contact with Elijah, Isaiah, John, Paul, et al. But time has drawn the
veil, and we cannot lift it. We must look at them through the varying
atmosphere of many generations, and the best we can do is to avail
ourselves of the best aids possible, and through them draw as near as
possible to these great and good characters, so closely linked with our
religious belief and our faith in the Infinite and Eternal.

One of Brooklyn’s greatest divines once said, that he had never visited
Palestine personally, but by study he had become so thoroughly acquainted
with that country, that, should he be left at any point in Palestine at
midnight, he would be able to tell in the morning, from the surrounding
topography, where he was.

So the editor of this volume has sought the scholars who have been
recognized by the world as the leading religious teachers of their age,
and culled from their utterances choice selections, respecting Jesus and
the “Holy men of old, who spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.”

DR. TALMAGE, who, perhaps, more than any other living preacher, has
commanded the public ear.

JOSEPH PARKER, who, from his immense intellectual store-house, well
filled, has brought out such wonderful thoughts, respecting the Bible
Characters.

DWIGHT L. MOODY, who moved the millions, both of this country and Great
Britain. What was the source of his power? Not superior scholarship--far
from it. Not his general appearance: for that, while not mean, was
neither imposing nor inspiring. Not his eloquence; he never depended upon
that. What, then, was the source of his power? It was the power of God.
The Holy Spirit used him as a means in the conversion of souls.

The editor of this volume then presents you, in this age, when
intelligent minds are looking for the greatest and the best, with the
best thoughts of these great men, respecting the Christ and other great
characters which adorn the pages of the Holy Writ.

                                                          C. B. GILLETTE.

CHICAGO, ILL., JANUARY 1, 1902.




CONTENTS.


                                    PAGE

             DWIGHT LYMAN MOODY.

    Abel                              17
    Abraham                           18
    Ahab                              21
    Barabbas                          25
    Bartimeus and Zacchæus            27
    Belshazzar                        32
    Caleb                             34
    Daniel                            36
    David                             54
    Elijah                            55
    Gideon                            60
    Ittai                             61
    Jacob                             63
    Jacob’s Sons                      67
    John the Baptist                  68
    Joshua                            84
    Lot                               95
    Martha                           103
    Mephibosheth                     107
    Moses                            111
    Naaman                           114
    Peter                            122
    Saul                             136
    Simeon                           141
    The Good Samaritan               144
    The Leper                        149
    The Penitent Thief               152
    The Pharisee & The Publican      164
    The Widow’s Son                  172
    Rock of Ages                     175
    Where He Leads I Follow          176

             T. DE WITT TALMAGE.

    Athaliah                         177
    David                            181
    Deborah                          187
    Dorcas                           188
    Ehud                             198
    Esau                             200
    Felix and Drusilla               201
    Gallery of Characters            204
    Gideon                           206
    Hezekiah                         207
    Jehoiakim                        209
    Jehu                             211
    Jesus at Emmaus                  214
    Job                              215
    Jonah                            217
    Joseph                           220
    Lazarus                          224
    Noah                             230
    Othniel                          231
    Paul                             234
    Pharaoh                          246
    Pontius Pilate                   247
    Queen of Sheba                   252
    Salome                           254
    Saul                             257
    Solomon                          259
    The Gentile Mother               263
    Zacchæus                         266
    Nearer, My God, To Thee          268

               JOSEPH PARKER.

    Abijah                           269
    Ahab                             282
    Ahaziah                          308
    Asa                              314
    Athaliah                         321
    Balaam                           328
    Elah                             339
    Elijah                           342
    Elisha                           332
    Gehazi                           374
    Hezekiah                         384
    Jabez                            401
    Jehoram                          404
    Jehoram, King of Judah           414
    Jehoshaphat                      421
    Jehu                             430
    Job                              440
    Micaiah                          447
    Moses                            449
    Nebuchadnezzar                   457
    Queen of Sheba                   459
    Rehoboam                         461
    Shishak                          466
    Solomon                          467
    Baseless Pride                   476




ILLUSTRATIONS

Selected Especially for This Work

FROM THE GREAT ART GALLERIES OF THE WORLD


  THE EXPULSION FROM THE GARDEN.
  From the Painting by Gustave Dore.             Opposite Page Frontispiece

  THE TRIAL OF THE FAITH OF ABRAHAM. Genesis, xxii.        Opposite Page 16

  “THE FIRST MOURNERS.”
  From the Painting by Bougereau.                          Opposite Page 17

  THE ARRIVAL OF THE GOOD SAMARITAN AT THE INN.
  From the Painting by Gustave Dore.                      Opposite Page 144

  DAVID.
  From Statue by Angelo.                                  Opposite Page 145

  JACOB TENDING FLOCKS OF LABAN.
  From the Painting by Gustave Dore.                      Opposite Page 160

  MOSES BREAKING THE TABLES OF THE LAW.
  From the Painting by Gustave Dore.                      Opposite Page 161

  THE PROPHET AMOS.
  From the Painting by Gustave Dore.                      Opposite Page 288

  THE DESPAIR OF JUDAS.
  From a Photograph of the Character in the Passion Play. Opposite Page 289

  JOSEPH INTERPRETING PHARAOH’S DREAM. Genesis, xli.
  From the Painting by Gustave Dore.                      Opposite Page 304

  ST. PAUL.
  From the Painting by Raphael.                           Opposite Page 305

  SOLOMON.
  From the Painting by Gustave Dore.                      Opposite Page 432

  THE JUDGMENT OF SOLOMON.
  From the Painting by Gustave Dore.                      Opposite Page 433

  THE CROSS.
  From the Painting by Gustave Dore.                      Opposite Page 448

  MOSES IN THE BULRUSHES.
  From the Painting by Gustave Dore.                      Opposite Page 449

[Illustration: THE TRIAL OF THE FAITH OF ABRAHAM. Genesis, xxii.]

[Illustration: “THE FIRST MOURNERS.”--From the Painting by Bougereau.]




BIBLE CHARACTERS

DESCRIBED IN HIS SOUL-WINNING SERMONS BY THE WORLD-KNOWN EVANGELIST,
DWIGHT LYMAN MOODY.


ABEL.

Abel was the first man who went to Heaven, and he went by way of blood.
So we find it in all the worships of God from the earliest times.

In the story of Abel and Cain we are told: “In process of time it came to
pass that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the
Lord. And Abel also brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of the
fat thereof, and the Lord had respect unto Abel and to his offering; but
unto Cain and his offering He had not respect. And Cain was very wroth,
and his countenance fell.”

Now, we find that Cain brought a bloodless sacrifice--“he brought of the
fruit of the ground”--and Abel brought a bleeding lamb. Right on the
morning of grace we see here that God had marked a way for men to come to
Him, and that way was the way that Abel took, and Cain came to God with
a sacrifice of his own, in his own way. Cain, perhaps, reasoned that he
did not see why the products of the earth--why the fruit--should not be
as acceptable to God as a bleeding lamb. He did not like a bleeding lamb,
and so he brought his fruit.

Now, we do not know how there was any difference between those two boys.
Both must have been brought up in the same way; both came from the same
parents. Yet we find in the offerings there was a difference between them.


ABRAHAM.

In the twenty-second chapter of Genesis we find the story of Abraham and
his only son, Isaac. Abraham was a follower of God, a man who loved and
feared God, and He commanded him to make a blood sacrifice.

We read in this chapter that He commanded Abraham to make the sacrifice
of his only son. And we read that the next morning the old man saddled
his ass and started. He did not tell his wife any thing about it. If he
had, she would likely have persuaded him to remain where he was. But he
has heard the voice of God, and he obeys the command. He has heard God’s
wish, and he is going to do it.

So, early in the morning--Abraham did not wait till 10 or 12 o’clock, but
went early in the morning--he takes two of his young men with him and his
son Isaac, and you can see him starting out on the three days’ journey.
They have the wood and the fire, for he is going to worship his God.

As Abraham goes on, he looks at his boy and says: “It is a strange
commandment that God has given. I love this boy dearly. I do not
understand it, but I do know it is all right, for the Judge of all the
earth makes no mistakes.” An order from the Judge of Heaven is enough for
Abraham.

The first night comes, their little camp is made, and Isaac is asleep.
But the old man does not sleep. He looks into the face of his sleeping
boy, and sadly says: “I will have no boy soon. I shall never see him on
this earth again. But I must obey God.”

I can see Abraham marching on the next day, and you might have seen him
drying his tears as he glanced upon that only son and thought upon what
he had been called upon to do. The second night comes; tomorrow is the
day for the sacrifice. What a night that must have been to Abraham! Hear
him say: “Tomorrow I must take the life of that boy--my only son, dearer
to me than any thing on earth--dearer to me than my life.”

The third day comes, and as they go along they see the mountain in the
distance. Then Abraham says to the young men: “You stay here with the
beasts.” He takes the wood and the fire, and along with his boy prepares
to ascend Mount Moriah, from the peak of which could be seen the spot
where, a few hundred years later, the Son of man was offered up.

As they ascend the mountain Isaac says: “Here are the wood and the fire,
father. But where is the sacrifice?” This question shows that the boy
knew nothing of what was in store. How the question must have sunk down
into the old man’s heart! And he only answers: “The Lord will provide a
sacrifice.” It was not time to tell him, and they go on until they come
to the place appointed by God, and build the altar, and lay the wood upon
it. Every thing is ready, and I can just imagine the old man take the boy
by the hand, and, leading him to a rock, sitting down there and telling
him how God had called upon him to come out of his native land; how God
had been in communion with him for fifty years; what God had done for
him. “And now,” he says, “my boy, when I was in my bed three nights ago,
God came to me with a strange message, in which He told me to offer my
child as a sacrifice. I love you, my son, but God has told me to do this,
and I must obey Him. So let us both go down on our knees and pray to Him.”

After they have sent up a petition to God, Abraham lays Isaac on the
altar and kisses him for the last time. He lifts the knife to drive
it into his son’s heart, when all at once he hears a voice: “Abraham!
Abraham! Spare thine only son.”

Ah! There was no voice heard on Calvary to save the Son of Man. God
showed mercy to the son of Abraham. You fathers and mothers, just picture
to yourselves how you would suffer if you had to sacrifice your only
son. And think what it must have caused God to give up His only Son. We
are told that Abraham was glad. This manifestation of Abraham’s faith
so pleased God that He showed him the grace of Heaven and lifted the
curtain of time to let him look down into the future to see the Son of
God offered, bearing the sins of the world.


AHAB.

There is a familiar saying: “Every man has his own price.”

Ahab had his, and he sold himself for a garden; Judas sold himself for
thirty pieces of silver, and Esau for a mess of pottage.

Ahab sold himself just to please a fallen woman. And so we might go
on--citing the men who have sold themselves. It is easy for us to condemn
these men, but let us see if there are not men and women doing the same
thing today. How many are selling themselves tonight for naught! It is
easy enough to condemn Judas, Herod and Ahab, but in doing this do we not
condemn ourselves?

We thought that slavery was hard. We thought it hard that those poor
black people should be put upon the block, in the market, and sold to the
highest bidder; but what do you think of those men who sell themselves
today to evil?

Ahab sold himself to evil, and what did he get?

Elijah was the best friend that Ahab had, but he did not think so; he
thought that Elijah was his enemy. Ahab was a religious man--that is,
he thought he was. He had 850 prophets. “And what king has more? What
king does more for religion than I?” So he would have said. There is a
difference between religion and having Christ. There are a great many
people that have religion but have no Christ in it--that have not a spark
of Christianity.

This man was very religious, but he began wrong. His marriage was his
first wrong step. He did not care about the law of God. He wanted to
strengthen his kingdom. I can imagine they said: “We have outgrown the
laws of Moses. We do not want your God; we have got something better.
Here are the nations all around us worshiping Baal, and we will worship
Baal.”

Ahab’s wife, Jezebel, wanted the patriarchs and the prophets put to
death, and they were put to death. Obadiah had a few, but wherever they
were found they were put to death. I suppose they said of Elijah: “That
man belongs to the old Puritanical school.” He was bigoted and narrow.
The idea of only worshiping one God! Ahab was willing to turn away from
the God of Elijah, but he did not look to have Elijah reprove him, and
thus he was his enemy. Many a man who has a good, praying mother thinks
that mother is his enemy.

Ahab thought the God of Elijah was not going to carry out His warning. I
will leave it to you if the man who warns you of danger is not the best
friend you have got. If I saw a man about to walk over a precipice and
he was blind and I did not warn him, would not the blood of that man
be required at my hands? Would not I be guilty morally? Jezebel hated
Elijah, and she disliked him for his warnings. The man who warns you is
the best friend that you have got.

Suppose I am going home at night--at midnight--and I see a building on
fire and I pass along and say not a word about it, and the occupants
are all asleep and I go right home and go to bed, and in the morning I
find that fifteen people in that house were burned up--how you would
condemn me! And if in preaching the Gospel I do not warn you about your
danger--about your sins and God’s punishment--what will you say to me
when I meet you at the Eternal Throne? I do not want you to think that
I am trying to please the people by preaching that the just and unjust
will fare alike. You may be successful for a time. Ahab had two grand and
glorious victories upon the battle field, and he was a very popular man
for a while. He built a palace of ivory, and just here I want to speak of
one act of that man.

When Ahab’s beautiful palace was finished, he found there was a poor man
who had a garden near it. This Ahab wanted. And Ahab came to Naboth, the
poor man, and wanted him to sell his garden. But Naboth said he could not
do so, for it was against the law of his people. Then Ahab said to him:
“I will give you a better place than this, and I will give you a better
vineyard than this.” But Naboth was firm, and would not agree to sell his
garden.

Many men would have liked to sell to the king. Such would have said: “We
know it is against the law, but he is foolish not to sell to the king.”

Naboth said: “God forbid that I should sell.”

Ahab returns to his palace, where he pouts like a child. Jezebel notices
him, and begins to speak with him. She asks: “What is the matter?” Ahab
makes answer like a peevish child: “I want Naboth’s garden.” And she asks
him why he does not take it, and then he tells her. Again she asks:

“Are you not king of Israel?”

“Yes.”

“Well! Then why do you not get it? I will get it for you, and it shall
not cost you any thing. I will arrange it.”

Then Jezebel sent that infamous letter to the truculent elders. Those
elders were just as bad as Jezebel. They knew that Naboth served the
God of Heaven. The instructions of the letter were followed. The two
witnesses said they saw Naboth despise God and the king, and so he was
taken out and stoned to death. I can see him kneeling there and the
crowds taking up the stones and hurling them at him.

Well, when Ahab goes down to take possession of that vineyard there is a
message that had come from the throne of Heaven. God has been watching
him. He notices all of us, and there is not a hellish act that has been,
or is going to be, committed but God knows about it. Elijah stood before
Ahab as the latter went down to that garden, and Ahab got out of his
chariot and met him. He knew that Elijah knew all, and he did not like to
be reproved. Ill-gotten gains do not bring peace. If you get any thing
at the cost of the truth or honor, it will be peace lost for time, and
perhaps for eternity.

As he walked through that garden, Ahab looked up and said: “Why, is not
that Elijah?” He knew it was, and he knew what it meant. Elijah walks up
to him and asks: “Hast thou killed and taken possession?” Ahab answers:
“I wonder how he found that out. He knows all about me.” And then Elijah
said: “In the place where the dogs licked the blood of Naboth they shall
lick thy blood.”

Then Ahab asked the prophet: “Mine enemy, have you found me out?”

Elijah answered: “Yes. Because you have sold yourself to evil, you will
be found out.”

A few years before, Ahab had laughed at Elijah, but he now remembered
that every thing which Elijah’s God had promised had been done, and he
could not get these words out of his mind: “In the place where the dogs
licked the blood of Naboth they shall lick thy blood.” Sometimes just one
act, that we can do in a minute, will cost us years of trouble and pain.
Little did Ahab think that it was going to cost him his kingdom and cause
his whole family to be swept from the face of the earth when he gave the
promise to Jezebel to write that letter.

Ahab lived three years after Elijah met him in that garden, and how many
times do you suppose those awful words of Elijah came into his mind? He
could not get them out of his mind. Jezebel tried to help him, but she
could not. He wanted to improve the garden, and no doubt he did improve
it; but whenever he walked there the words came to him which Elijah had
spoken. Then the time came for the judgment against Ahab to be carried
out, and the Bible tells how it was done.


BARABBAS.

I have often thought what a night Barabbas must have spent just before
the day when Christ was crucified.

As the sun goes down, he says to himself: “Tomorrow--only tomorrow--and I
must die upon the cross! They will hang me up before a crowd of people;
they will drive nails through my hands and feet; they will break my legs
with bars of iron; and in that awful torture I shall die before this time
tomorrow, and go up to the Judgment with all my crimes upon me.”

Maybe, they let his mother come to see him once more before dark. Perhaps
he had a wife and children, and they came to see him for the last time.
He could not sleep at all that night. He could hear somebody hammering
in the prison yard, and knew they must be making the cross. He would
start up every now and then, thinking that he heard the footsteps of the
officers coming for him.

At last the light of the morning looks in through the bars of his prison.

“Today--this very day--they will open that door and lead me away to be
crucified!”

Pretty soon he hears them coming. No mistake this time. They are
unbarring the iron door. He hears them turning the key in the rusty lock.
Then the door swings open. There are the soldiers.

Good-by to life and hope! Death--horrible death--now! And after
death--what will there be then?

The officer of the guard speaks to him: “Barabbas, you are free!”

He hears the strange words, but they make very little impression on him.
He is so near dead with fear and horror that the good news does not reach
him. His ears catch the sound, but he thinks it is a foolish fancy. He is
asleep and dreaming. He stands gazing a moment at the soldiers, and then
he comes to himself.

“Do not laugh at me! Do not make sport of me! Take me away and crucify
me, but do not tear my soul to pieces!” Again the officer speaks: “_You
are free!_ Here--the door is open! Go out--go home!”

Now he begins to take in the truth. But it is so wonderful a thing to get
out of the clutches of the Roman law that he is afraid to believe the
good news. And so he begins to doubt, and to ask how it can be.

They tell him that Pilate has promised the Jews the release of one
prisoner that day, and that the Jews have chosen him instead of one Jesus
of Nazareth, who was condemned to be crucified.

Now the poor man begins to weep. This breaks his heart. He knows this
Jesus. He has seen Him perform some of His miracles. He was in the crowd,
picking pockets, when Jesus fed the five thousand hungry people.

“What! That just man to die! And I--a thief, a highwayman, a murderer--to
go free!”

And in the midst of his joy at his own release his heart breaks at the
thought that his life is saved at such a cost.


BARTIMEUS AND ZACCHÆUS.

In the eighteenth chapter of the Gospel of St. Luke you will find Christ
was going into Jericho, and as He drew near the gates of the city there
was a poor blind man who sat by the wayside, begging people to give him a
farthing, and crying out: “Have mercy on a poor blind man!”

This blind beggar met a man who said to him: “I have good news to tell
you, Bartimeus.”

“What is it?” asked the beggar.

“There is a man of Israel who can give you sight.”

“Oh, no! There is no chance of my ever receiving my sight. I never shall
see. In fact, I never saw the mother who gave me birth. I never saw the
wife of my bosom. I never saw my own children. I never saw in this world,
but I expect to see in the world to come.”

“Let me tell you. I have just come down from Jerusalem, and I saw that
village carpenter, Jesus of Nazareth; and I saw a man who was born blind,
who had received his sight, and I never saw a man who had better sight.
He does not even have to use glasses.”

Then hope rises for the first time in this poor man’s heart, and he says:
“Tell me how the man got his sight.”

“Oh,” says the other, “Jesus first spat upon the ground and made clay,
and put it on his eyes, and then He told the man to wash his eyes in
the pool of Siloam, and he would receive his sight. More than that,
Bartimeus: He does not charge you any thing. You have no fee to pay. You
just tell him what you want, and you get it--without money and without
price. It does not need dukes, lords or influence. You just call upon Him
yourself. And if He ever comes this way, do not let Him go back without
your going to see Jesus.”

And Bartimeus said: “I will try it. There is no harm in trying it.”

I can imagine Bartimeus being led by a child to his seat, as usual, and
that he is crying out: “Please give a blind beggar a farthing.”

He hears the footsteps of the coming multitude, and he inquires: “Who is
passing? What does this multitude mean?” They tell him that it is Jesus
of Nazareth passing by. The moment he hears that he says: “Why, that is
the man that gave sight to the blind!”

The moment it reached his ear that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to
cry out at the top of his voice: “Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy
upon me!”

Some of those who went before--perhaps Peter was one of them--rebuked
him, thinking the Master was going up to Jerusalem to be crowned King,
and did not want to be distracted. They never knew the Son of God when He
was here. He would hush every harp in Heaven to hear a sinner pray. No
music would delight Him so much. But the blind man still lifted up his
voice, and cried louder: “Thou Son of David, have mercy on me!”

This prayer reached the ears of the Son of God, as prayer always will,
and they led the poor blind man to Him. Well, when Jesus heard the blind
beggar, He commanded him to be brought. So they ran to him, and said: “Be
of good cheer. The Master calls you. He has a blessing for you.”

When Jesus saw Bartimeus He said: “What can I do for you?”

“Lord, that I may receive sight.”

“You shall have it.”

And the Lord gave it to him. And now the beggar follows with the crowd,
glorifying God. I can imagine he sang as sweetly as Mr. Sankey--and no
one can sing more sweetly than he--when he shouted: “Hosanna to the Son
of David!” No one sang louder than this one who had received his sight.
Then he follows on with the crowd, which we see pressing into the
gates of the city. I can imagine, when he gets into the city, he says
to himself: “I will go down and see Mrs. Bartimeus.” Of course, after
all those years of blindness, he had some curiosity to see what his wife
looked like.

As he is passing down the street, a man meets him, and turns around and
says: “Bartimeus, is that you?”

“Yes; it is I.”

“Well, I thought so, and yet I feared my eyes must deceive me. How did
you get your sight?”

“I just met Jesus of Nazareth outside the walls of the city, and I asked
Him to have mercy on me; and He gave me sight.”

“Jesus of Nazareth! Is he now in this part of the country?”

“Yes; He is on His way to Jerusalem. He is now going down to the eastern
gate.”

“I should like to see Him,” says the man. And he runs straightway down
the street. But he can not get a glimpse of Him, being small of stature,
on account of the great throng around Him. He runs to a sycamore tree,
and says to himself: “If I get up there and hide, without any one seeing
me, He can not get by without my having a good look at Him.”

A great many rich men do not like to be seen coming to Jesus.

Well, there he is in the sycamore tree, on a branch hanging right over
the highway, and he says to himself: “He can not get by without my having
a good look at Him.” All at once the crowd comes in sight. He looks
at John. “That is not He.” He looks at Peter. “No, that is not He.”
Then he sees One who is fairer than the sons of men. “That is He!” And
Zacchæus, just peeping out from among the branches, looks down upon that
wonderful--yes, that mighty--God-Man in amazement.

At last the crowd comes to the tree, and it looks as if Christ is going
by; but He stops right under the tree. All at once He looks up and sees
Zacchæus, and says to him: “Zacchæus, make haste and come down.”

I can imagine Zacchæus says to himself: “I wonder who told Him my name. I
was never introduced to Him.” But Christ knew all about him.

Well, He said to Zacchæus: “Make haste and come down.” He may have added:
“This is the last time I shall pass this way, Zacchæus.” That is the way
He speaks to sinners. “This may be the last time I shall pass this way.
This may be your last chance of eternity.” There are some people in this
nineteenth century who do not believe in sudden conversions. I should
like them to tell me where Zacchæus was converted. He certainly was not
converted when he went up into the tree, but he certainly was converted
when he came down. He must have been converted somewhere between the
branches and the ground.

The Lord converted him right there. People say they do not believe in
sudden conversions, and that if a man is converted suddenly he will not
hold out--he will not be genuine. I wish we had a few men converted like
Zacchæus in London. They would make no small stir. When a man begins to
make restitution it is a pretty good sign of conversion. Let men give
back money dishonestly obtained in London, and see how quickly people
will believe in conversion. Zacchæus gave half his goods to the poor.
What would be said if some of the rich men of London did that? Zacchæus
gave half his goods all at once, and he said: “If I have taken any thing
from any man falsely, I restore him fourfold.” I think that is the other
half.

But to get Christ is worth more than all his wealth. I imagine, the next
morning, one of the servants of Zacchæus going with a check for £100, and
saying: “My master a few years ago took from you wrongfully about £25,
and this is restitution money.”

That would give confidence in Zacchæus’s conversion.


BELSHAZZAR.

In the fifth chapter of Daniel we read the history of King Belshazzar. It
is very short. Only one chapter tells us all we know about him. One short
sight of his career is all we see. He just seems to burst upon the stage
and then disappears. We are told that he gave a great feast, and at this
feast he had a thousand of his lords, and they were drinking and praising
the gods of silver, of gold, of brass, of iron and of wood, out of the
vessels which had been brought from the Temple at Jerusalem.

As they were drinking out of these vessels of gold and silver from the
house of God--I do not know but it was at the hour of midnight--all at
once came forth the fingers of a man’s hand and began to write upon the
wall of the banquet hall.

The king turns deathly pale, his knees shake together and he trembles
from head to foot. Perhaps if some one had told him the time was coming
when he would be put into the balance and weighed he would have laughed
at him. But he knows the vital hour has come, and that the hand has
written his doom in the words: “Mene, mene, tekel, upharsin.”

He calls the wise men of his kingdom, and the man who can interpret
this will be made the third ruler of his realm, and shall be clothed in
scarlet and have a chain about his neck. One after another tried, but the
eyes of no uncircumcised man could make it out. Belshazzar was greatly
troubled. At last one was spoken of who had been able to interpret the
dream of his father, Nebuchadnezzar. He was told if he would send for
Daniel the latter might interpret the writing.

So the prophet was brought in, and he looked upon the handwriting.
He told the king how his father had gone against God, and how he
(Belshazzar) had gone against the Lord of Heaven, and how his reign was
finished. And this was the meaning of the mysterious writing:

“MENE--God hath numbered thy kingdom and finished it.

“TEKEL--Thou art weighed in the balance, and art found wanting.

“PERES--Thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians.”

The trial is over, the verdict is rendered and the sentence brought out.
That very night the king was hurled from his throne. That very night the
army of Darius came tearing down the streets, and then you might have
heard the clash of arms and shouts of war, and might have seen the king’s
blood mingling with the wine in that banquet hall.


CALEB.

Caleb and Joshua are great favorites of mine. They have got a ring about
them. They were not all the time looking for hindrances and obstacles in
their way. They got their eyes above them.

You remember how those men were sent forward to spy out the land of
Canaan. They had been sent out forty days to go over that land. They went
from the wilderness of Zin to Rehob, and thence unto Hebron. And when
they reached the “brook of Eshcol they secured a branch with one cluster
of grapes, and bare it between two upon a staff; and they brought of the
pomegranates and of the figs.”

They were gone forty days, and the twelve men brought back what Congress
would call a majority and a minority report. Ten men reported that they
had gone unto the land to which they were sent, and that surely it flowed
with milk and honey. And so God’s word was true. They found milk and
honey. And they brought along grapes.

But ten of them were full of unbelief. They further reported that they
saw giants there--the sons of Anak, which come of the giants. The
Hittites, Jebusites, Amalekites and Amorites dwelt there. They were
all there, and also those great giants, in whose sight they were as
grasshoppers. It was a great war city, and they asked themselves if they
looked as though they were able to war with such giants. They said: “We
are not able.”

They undoubtedly brought back maps and charts, and said: “There is the
region. It would be monstrous for us to attempt to take it. There are
massive iron gates and a great wall, and we are not able to take it.
We are defenseless people--without any weapons. We will not be able to
overcome those people.”

I can imagine one man said: “Why, I looked up at those giants, and I
seemed as a little grasshopper, and I felt as small as a grasshopper. We
can not hope to cope with those giants. It is a good land, but we will
not be able to go up and possess it.”

Then they began to murmur. It does not take a very great while to get
unbelievers to murmuring. But Caleb tried to encourage them. He says to
them: “Let us go up at once and possess the land. We are well able to
overcome it.”

Even Joshua joined in with Caleb, and they proved two with the faith. To
be sure, they were in the minority; but if the Lord is with us we are
able to prove a powerful majority over the enemy. They determined to take
it, and they wandered across all through Canaan, but the people took up
stones, and would have stoned them to death. But “the glory of the Lord
appeared in the tabernacle of the congregation, before all the children
of Israel.”

And about three millions of people wandered in the wilderness for forty
years, until all the men laid themselves down in the desert grave and
were kept out of the Promised Land--all on account of their unbelief. And
I believe today that four-fifths of the church is wandering around in the
wilderness, far away from the cross of Calvary and the Promised Land. We
are able to have victory with God with us.

Ten men were looking at all those obstacles that this new land presented
to them, while these two men--Caleb and Joshua--looked up yonder. And
they saw God’s face and remembered the waste in Egypt, the crossing of
the Red Sea, the destruction which was brought upon the Philistines, the
water from the flint rock, and they believed that God was able--as He
most certainly was--to give them that land He had promised.


DANIEL.

I want to talk about the life of the prophet, Daniel. The word means
“God with him”--not the public with him, not his fellow men, but God.
Therefore, he had to report himself to God and hold himself responsible
to Him.

I do not know just what time Daniel went down to Babylon. I know that in
the third year of King Jehoakim Nebuchadnezzar took ten thousand of the
chief men of Jerusalem, and carried them captive down to Babylon. I am
glad these chief men, who brought on the war, were given into the great
king’s hands. Unlike too many of the ringleaders in our great war, they
got the punishment on their own heads.

Among the captives were four young men. They had been converted,
doubtless, under Jeremiah, the “weeping prophet” that God had sent to the
children of Israel. Many had mocked at him when he lifted up his voice
against their sins. They had laughed at his tears and told him to his
face--as many say of us--that he was getting up a false excitement. But
these four young men listened, and they had the backbone to come out for
God.

And now, after they were come to Babylon, the king said a number of the
children should be educated, and ordered the same kind of meat and wine
set before them that were used in his palace, and that at the end of a
year they should be brought before him. Daniel and his three friends were
among these.

Now, no young man ever comes to the city without having great temptation
cross his path as he enters it. And just at this turning point in his
life, as in Daniel’s, must lie the secret of his success. This was the
secret of young Daniel’s success: He took his stand with God right on his
entering the gate of Babylon, and cried to God to keep him steadfast.
And he needed to cry hard. A law of his and his nation’s God was that
no man must eat meat offered to idols, but now comes the king’s first
edict, that this young man should eat the same kind of meat he himself
did. I do not think that it took young Daniel long to make up his mind.
The law of God forbade it, and he would not do it. “He purposed in his
heart”--in his heart; mark this--that he would not defile himself. He did
not resolve in his head, but love in his heart prompted him. If some
Chicago Christians could have advised Daniel, they would have said to
him: “Don’t you do it; don’t set aside the meat. That would be a species
of Phariseeism.” Oh, yes; they would have insisted to the poor young
captive that he should carry out the commandments of his God when he was
in his own country, but not there where he was but a poor slave; he could
not possibly carry along his own religion down there to Babylon.

Thank God, this young man would not eat the meat, and, ordering it
taken away, he got the eunuch to bring him pulse. And behold, when he
came before the king, the eunuch’s fears were gone, for the faces of
Daniel and the rest of the dear boys were fairer and fatter than any
that the king looked down upon. They had not noses--like too many in our
streets--as red as if they were just going to blossom. It is God’s truth,
and Daniel tested it, that cold water, with a clear conscience, is far
better than wine.

And the king one day had a dream, and all the wise men were called before
him. But they all said: “We can not interpret it; it is too hard.” The
king, being wroth, threatened them. Still getting no answer, he made an
edict that all the wise men should be put to death. And the officers came
to Daniel, with the rest of the wise men, but Daniel was not afraid.

I can imagine he prayed to God, falling low on his knees and with his
face to the earth, and asked Him for guidance; and then he crawled
into bed and slept like a child. We would hardly sleep well under such
circumstances. And in his sleep God told him the meaning of the dream.
There must have been joy among the wise men that one of their number had
found it, and that the king would save their lives. And he is brought
before the king, and cries out: “O king, while thou didst lie with thy
head on thy pillow, thou didst dream, and in thy dream thou sawest a
great image.”

I can imagine, at these opening words, how the kings eyes flashed, and
how he cried out with joy: “Yes, that is it--the whole thing comes back
to me now.”

And then Daniel, in a death-like stillness, unfolded all the
interpretation, and told the king that the golden head of the great image
represented his own government. I suppose Babylon was the biggest city
ever in the world. It was sixty miles around. Some writers put the walls
from sixty-five to eighty-five feet high and twenty-five feet wide. Four
chariots could drive abreast on top of them. A street fifteen miles long
divided the grand city, and hanging gardens in acres made the public
parks. It was like Chicago--so flat that they had to resort to artificial
mounds; and, again like Chicago, the products of vast regions flowed
right into and through it.

This great kingdom, Daniel told the king, was his own; but he said a
destroying kingdom should come, and afterward a third and fourth kingdom,
when, at the last, the God of Heaven should set up His kingdom.

Daniel lived to see the first kingdom overthrown, when the Medes and
Persians came in, and centuries after came Alexander, and then the Romans.

I believe in the literal fulfillment, so far, of Daniel’s God given words
and in the sure fulfillment of the final prophecy of the “stone cut out
of the mountains without hands,” that by-and-by shall grind the kingdoms
of this world into dust, and bring in the Kingdom of Peace. Then will be
the Millennium, and Christ will sway His scepter over all the earth.

Well, the king was very much pleased. He gave to Daniel a place near
the throne, and he became one of the chief men of the world. His three
friends were also put in high office. God had blessed them signally, and
He blessed them still more--and that was, perhaps, a harder thing--in
keeping them true to Him in their prosperity. Their faith and fortunes
waxed strong together.

Time went on, and now we reach a crisis indeed. “Nebuchadnezzar, the
king,” we read, “made an image of gold, one hundred and ten feet high and
nine feet wide.” It was not gilded, but was solid gold. When Babylon was
pillaged the second time a single god was found in the temple that was
worth more than two million pounds sterling. The king’s monstrous image
was set up in the Plains of Dura, near to the city. I suppose he wanted
to please his kingly vanity by inaugurating a universal religion.

When the time came for the dedication I do not suppose Daniel was there.
He was probably in Egypt, or some other province, on affairs of the
empire. Counselors, satraps, high secretaries and the princes of the
people were ordered to hasten to the dedication, and when they should
hear the sound of the cornet, flute and psaltery announce that the great
idol was consecrated they were to bow down and worship it.

Perhaps they called the ceremony the unveiling of the monument, as we
should say. But one command was made certain. At a given signal all the
people were to fall to the earth in worship. But in the law of God there
is something against that. “Thou shalt have none other gods but Me.”
God’s law went right against the king’s.

Would all of us have Daniel’s three friends to do the right thing at any
hazard? Would none of us, without backbone, have advised them to just bow
down a little, so that no one would notice it, or to merely bow down but
not worship it?

The hour came, and Daniel’s friends refused to bow down. They refused
utterly to bend the knee to a god of gold. How many cry out in this city:
“Give me gold--give me money--and I will do any thing!” Such may think
that men in Nebuchadnezzar’s time should not bow down to a golden idol,
but they themselves are daily doing just that very thing. Money is their
golden image, or position, or golden ambition.

Well, the informers came to the king, and told him that Shadrach, Meshach
and Abednego had stood with unbended knee, and straightway they were
hurried before him. The old king, speechless with rage, was gesturing his
commands. I can imagine that one last chance was given them, after the
king finally regained his voice, and that one of them, probably Meshach,
spoke up in a firm but respectful voice that they must obey God rather
than man.

At once the raging king cried out: “What is your God that He can deliver
you out of our hands?” And in the same breath he screamed a command to
bind them hand and foot and cast them into the fiery furnace, and make
it seven times hotter than ever. The command was instantly executed, and
the flames leaped out from the door and consumed the officers who cast
them in.

But Jesus was with His servants as the flames raged about them, and soon
word was brought to the king that four men walked about in the flames.
Yes, they walked there with Jesus--they did not run--as in a green
pasture and beside still waters. And directly the king rushed up and
cried: “Ye sons of the living God, come forth.” And behold, even the hair
of their heads was not singed. Then the king made a royal edict, that all
in his realm should reverence the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego.

Then the king had a dream, and he was greatly perturbed thereby. This
time the particulars of the dream had not gone from him. They stood out
vivid and clear in his mind, as he sent out to fetch the wise men, and
called to them to give him the interpretation. But they can not give it.

When he had his first dream he had summoned these same soothsayers, but
they had stood silent. And now they stand silent again as the second
dream is told them. They can not interpret it. Then once again he sends
for the prophet, Daniel, whom he had named after one of his gods,
Belteshazzar. And the young prophet comes before the king, and as soon as
the king sees Daniel he feels sure that he will now get the meaning.

Calling out from his throne, he tells how he had dreamed a dream, wherein
he saw a tree in the midst of the earth, with branches that reached to
Heaven, and the sight thereof to the ends of the earth. The beasts of
the field had shelter under it, and the fowls of the air dwelt in the
boughs thereof. The tree was very fair and had much fruit, and all flesh
was fed on it. And then, lowering his voice, he tells how, as he gazed,
he saw a watcher and a holy one come down from Heaven, who cried aloud:
“Hew down the tree.”

“And now,” cries the king, “can you tell me the interpretation?”

For a time Daniel stands motionless. Does his heart fail him? The record
simply says: “For one hour he was astonished.” The ready words doubtless
rush to his lips, but he dislikes to let them out. He does not want to
tell how the king’s kingdom and mind are going to depart from him, and he
is to wander forth to eat grass like a beast. The king, too, hesitates;
a dark foreboding for a time gets the better of curiosity. But soon he
nerves himself to hear the worst, and speaks very kindly: “Do not be
afraid to tell me, O Daniel! Let not the dream or its interpretation
trouble thee.” And at last Daniel speaks: “O king, thou art the man. God
has exalted thee over every king and over all the world, but thou shalt
be brought low. Thou shalt be driven out from men, and shalt eat grass
among the beasts of the field; but thy kingdom--as the great watcher
spared the stump of the tree--shall afterward return to thee. Wherefore,
O king, break off thy sins by righteousness and thine iniquities by
showing mercy to the poor, if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquility.”

And straightway the king repented in sackcloth and ashes, and God stayed
the doom. But twelve months from that time we see Nebuchadnezzar
walking in his palace and boasting: “Is not this my great Babylon that
I have built by the might of my power and for the honor of my majesty!”
And behold, while he yet spake a voice came from Heaven, saying: “Thy
kingdom hath departed.” And undoubtedly God then touched his reason, and
straightway he ran madly through the gates to eat grass.

But his kingdom had not passed from him forever, and, according to
the prophet’s word, at the end of seven years--or, possibly, seven
months--his reason came back, and he returned to his palace. All his
princes and officers gathered about him. Then he immediately sent out
a new proclamation, and its closing words show his repentance, and how
Daniel had brought this mighty king to God:

“And at the end of the days I, Nebuchadnezzar, lifted up mine eyes unto
Heaven, and my understanding returned unto me, and I blessed the Most
High, and I praised and honored Him that liveth forever, whose dominion
is an everlasting dominion, and His kingdom is from generation to
generation.

“At the same time my reason returned unto me, and for the glory of my
kingdom mine honor and brightness returned unto me, and my councilors and
my lords sought unto me. I was established in my kingdom, and excellent
majesty was added unto me.

“Now I, Nebuchadnezzar, praise and extol the King of Heaven, all whose
works are truth and His ways judgment, and those that walk in pride He is
able to abase.”

And then he passes from the stage. This is the last record of him, and
undoubtedly he and Daniel now walk the crystal pavement together. That
mighty monarch was led to the God of the Hebrews by the faith of this
Hebrew slave, and just because he had a religion and dared to make it
known.

But now we lose sight of the prophet for a few years, perhaps fifteen or
twenty. The next we hear is that Belteshazzar is on the throne--possibly
as regent. He is believed to have been a grandson of Nebuchadnezzar.
One day he said he would make Daniel the third ruler of the people if
he would interpret for him the handwriting on the wall. He was probably
second himself, and Daniel would be next to him. Of this prince we have
only one glimpse. The feast scene is the first and last we have of him,
and it is enough. It was a great feast, and fully a thousand of his lords
sat down together. In those days feasts sometimes lasted six months. How
long this one lasted we do not know. The king caroused with his princes
and satraps and all the mighty men of Babylon, drinking and rioting and
praying to gods of silver and gold and brass and stubble--just what we
are doing today, if we bow the knee to the gods of this world. And the
revelers, waxing wanton, even go into the temple and lay sacrilegious
hands on the sacred vessels that had been brought away from Jerusalem,
and drank wine from them--drank toasts to idols and harlots. And,
undoubtedly, as they are drinking they scoff at the God of Israel.

I see these revelers swearing and rioting when, suddenly, the king turns
pale and trembles from head to foot. Above the golden candlesticks, on
a bare space on the wall, he sees the writing of the God of Zion. He
distinctly sees the terrible fingers. His voice shakes with terror, but
he manages to falter out: “Bring in the wise men! Any man who can read
the handwriting I will make third ruler of the kingdom.”

Then the wise men come trooping in, but there is no answer. Not one of
them can read it. They are skilled in Chaldean lore, but this stumps
them. At last the queen comes in and whispers: “O king, there is a man
in the kingdom who can read that writing. When your grandfather could
not interpret his dreams he sent for Daniel, the Hebrew, and he knew all
about them. Can we find him?”

They did find him, and now we see the man of God again standing before
a king’s throne. To the king’s hurried promises of gifts and honors
Daniel replies: “You can keep your rewards.” Quietly he turns his eyes
on the writing. He reads it at the first glance, for it is his Father’s
handwriting. He says:

“Mene--Thy kingdom hath departed from thee.

“Tekel--Thou art weighed in the balance, and art found wanting.

“Upharsin--Thy kingdom is divided. It is given over to the hands of the
enemy.”

How these words of doom must have rung through the palace that night!

And the destruction did not tarry. The king recovered himself, banished
his fears, and went on drinking in his hall. The mystery and its
interpretation were as an idle tale. He thought he was perfectly secure.
He had deemed the great walls of Babylon thoroughly safe. But there was
Darius besieging the city; the enemy was right upon him. Was that safe?
While they reveled, the river Euphrates, that flowed under the walls,
was turned into another channel. The hosts of Medes and Persians rushed
through, unobstructed, and in a few minutes more battered down the king’s
gate and broke through the palace guard into the inmost palace chamber.
And the king was slain, and his blood flowed in that banquet hall.

We are next told Darius took the throne and set over the people 120
rulers, and over these three presidents, of whom Daniel was first. And
so we find him in office again. I do not know how long he was in that
position. But by-and-by a conspiracy took head among his fellow officers
to get rid of him. They got jealous and said:

“Let’s see if we can get this man removed. He has bossed us long
enough--the sanctimonious old Hebrew.”

And then he was so impracticable, they could not do any thing with him.
There were plenty of collectors and treasurers, but he kept such a close
eye on them that they only made their salaries. There was no plundering
of the government with Daniel at the head. He was president of the
princes, and all revenue accounts passed before him. I can overhear the
plotters whispering: “If we can only put him out of the way, we can make
enough in two or three years to retire from office, have a city house in
Babylon and two or three villas in the country--have enough for all our
days. We can then go down to Egypt and see something of the world. As
things now are, we can only get our exact dues, and it will take years
to get any thing respectable. Yes, let us down this pious Jew.”

Well, they worked things so as to get an investigating committee, hoping
to catch him in his accounts. But they found no occasion for fault
against him. If he had put any relatives in office it would have been
found out. If he had been guilty of peculation, or in any way broken the
unalterable statutes of the kingdom, it would have come to light. What a
bright light was that, standing alone in that great city for God and the
majesty of law!

But at last they struck on one weak point, as they called it--he would
worship no one but the God of Israel. The law of his God was his only
assailable side. The conspirators reasoned in their plotting:

“If we can only get Darius to forbid any one making a request for thirty
days except from the king himself, we shall trap him, and then we can
cast him among the lions. We will take good care to have the lions
hungry.”

And the hundred and twenty princes took long council together. “Take
care,” they said; “you must draw up the paper which is to be signed by
the king with a deal of care and discretion. The king loves him, and
he has influence. Do not speak of the movement outside this meeting.
It might come to the ears of the king, and we must talk to the king
ourselves.”

When the mine is all ready, the hundred and twenty princes come to
the king and open their business with flattering speech. Naturally,
we hear these men saying: “King Darius, live for ever!” They tell him
how prosperous the realm is, and how much the people think of him. And
then they tell him, in the most plausible way that ever was, that if
he would be remembered by children’s children to all ages, just to sign
this decree. It would be a memorial of his greatness and goodness for
ever. And the king replies graciously: “What is the decree you wish me to
sign?” Casting his eye over the paper, he goes on: “I see no objection to
that.” In the pleasure of granting a request he thinks nothing of Daniel,
and the princes carefully refrain from jogging his memory. And he asks
for his signet ring, and gives the royal stamp. The edict has become one
of the laws of the Medes and Persians, that alter not. It reads: “Any
man that worships any God but me for thirty days shall be cast into the
lions’ den.”

The news spreads all through the city, and quickly gets to the ears of
Daniel. I can imagine some of them going to the prophet and advising him
about the edict, saying: “If you can only get out of the way for a little
time--if you can just quit Babylon for thirty days--it will advance your
own and the public interest together. You are the chief secretary and
treasurer; in fact, you are the chief ruler in the government. You are an
important man and can do as you please. Well, now, just you get out of
Babylon. Or, if you will stay in Babylon, do not let them catch you on
your knees. At all events, do not pray at the window toward Jerusalem. If
you must pray, close that window, pull down the curtain and put something
in the keyhole.”

I can imagine how that old prince, Daniel, now in his gray hairs, would
view such a proposition--that he desert his God in his old age. All
the remonstrances that must have been made fell dead. He just went on
praying as usual three times a day, with his face toward Jerusalem. This
old prophet found plenty of time to pray, though secretary and treasurer
of the most important empire of the world. And besides his own business,
he had to attend, doubtless, to much belonging of right to those hundred
and twenty. But he would never have been too busy or ashamed at a prayer
meeting to stand up for God.

Daniel had a purpose, and he dared to make that purpose known. He knew
whom he worshiped. The idea of looking back to church records of long
ago to see whether a man has professed religion is all wrong. In Babylon
they knew whom Daniel believed on. These hundred and twenty knew the very
day after the passage of the edict. He knows they are watching near his
window when the hour comes for prayer. He can see two men close at his
side, and he knows they are spies. Perhaps they may be taking down every
word he says for the papers.

The moment comes, and Daniel falls on his knees. In tones even louder
than ever he makes his prayer to the God of Israel, Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob. He does not omit to pray for the king. It is right to pray for our
rulers. The reason they are not better, oftentimes, is just because we do
not pray for them.

And now the spies rush to the king and say, “O Darius, live for ever! Do
you know there is a man here in your kingdom who will not obey you?”

“Will not obey me? Who is he?”

“Why, that man Daniel.”

And the king says: “I know he will not bow down and worship me. I know
that Daniel worships the God of Heaven.”

Then the king sets his heart to deliver him, all the day, from those
hundred and twenty men. But they come to him and say: “If you break your
law, your kingdom will depart. Your subjects will no longer obey you. You
must drive him to the lions’ den.”

So Darius is compelled to yield, and at last he gives the word to have
Daniel sent away and cast into the den of lions. These men take good care
to have the den filled with the most hungry beasts of Babylon. He is
thrown headlong into the den, but the angel of God flies down, and Daniel
lights unharmed on the bottom. The lions’ mouths are stopped. They are
as harmless as lambs. The old prophet, at the wonted hour, drops on his
knees and prays, with his face toward Jerusalem, as calmly as he did in
his chamber. And when it gets later he just lays his head on one of the
lions and goes to sleep. Undoubtedly no one in all Babylon sleeps more
sweetly than does Daniel in the lions’ den.

In the palace, the king can not sleep. He orders his chariot, and early
in the morning rattles over the pavement and jumps down at the lions’
den. I see the king alight from his chariot in eager haste, and hear him
cry down through the mouth of the den: “O Daniel, servant of the living
God! Is thy God, whom thou reverest continually, able to deliver thee
from the lions?”

Hark! Why, it is a resurrection voice! It is Daniel, saying: “My God is
able. He hath sent one of His angels, and hath shut the lions’ mouths.”

I can see them now just embrace each other, and together they jump into
the chariot and away they go back to the palace to breakfast.

I want to say something further about Daniel. I want to refer to how an
angel came to him, and, as we read in the twelfth chapter of Daniel, told
him he was a man greatly beloved. Another angel had come to him with the
same message. It is generally thought this last angel was the same one
spoken of in Revelations--first chapter and thirteenth verse--as coming
to John when banished to the Isle of Patmos. People thought he was sent
off there alone, but he was not; the angel of God was with him.

And so with Daniel. Here, in the tenth chapter and fifth verse, he says:
“Then I lifted up mine eyes, and behold, a certain man clothed with fine
linen, and otherwise arrayed as God’s messenger, who cried: ‘O Daniel, a
man greatly beloved, understand the words which I speak unto thee, and
stand upright, for unto thee am I now sent.’”

It was Daniel’s need that brought him from the glory land. It was the
Son of God right by his side in that strange land. And that was the
second time when the word came to him, saying he was greatly beloved.
Yes, three times a messenger came from the throne of God to tell him
this. I love to speak of that precious verse in the eleventh chapter--the
thirty-second verse: “The people that do know their God shall be strong
and do exploits.” I also love to speak of the twelfth chapter and second
and third verses: “And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth
shall awake, some to everlasting life and some to shame and everlasting
contempt; and they that be wise shall shine as the stars of the
firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever
and ever.”

This was the angel’s comfort to Daniel, and a great comfort it was.
The fact with all of us is that we like to shine. There is no doubt
about that. Every mother likes her child to shine. If her boy shines at
school by reaching the head of his class, the proud mother tells all
the neighbors, and she has a right to do so. But it is not the great of
this world that will shine the brightest. For a few years they may shed
bright light, but they go out in darkness, without an inner brightness.
Supplying the brightness, they go out in black darkness.

Where are the great men who did not know Daniel’s God? Did they shine
long? Why, we know of Nebuchadnezzar and the rest of them scarcely a
thing, except as they fill in the story about these humble men of God.
We are not told that statesmen shall shine; they may, for a few days or
years, but they are soon forgotten. Look at those great ones who passed
away in the days of Daniel. How wise in council they were! How mighty
and victorious over hundreds of nations! What gods upon earth they were!
Yet their names are forgotten--written only in the grave. Philosophers,
falsely so-called--do they live? Behold men of science--scientific men
they call themselves--going down into the bowels of the earth, digging
away at some carcass and trying to make it talk against the voice of God!
They shall go down to death, by-and-by, and their names shall rot.

But the man of God shines. Yes, he it is who shall shine as the stars
for ever and ever. This Daniel has been gone for 2,500 years, but still
increasing millions read of his life and actions. And so it shall be
to the end. He will only be better known and better loved; he shall
ever shine the brighter as the world grows older. Of a truth, they that
be wise and turn many to righteousness shall shine on, like stars, to
eternity.


DAVID.

You know how David fell. No man rose so high and fell so far, I think.
God took him from the sheepfold and put him upon a throne. He took him
from obscurity and made him king of Israel and Judea; gave him lands in
abundance, and would have given him more if he had wanted them. He was on
the pinnacle of glory, and honored among men.

But one day, while looking out of a window, he saw a woman with whom he
became enamored. He yielded to the temptation, and ordered her to be
brought into the palace, and committed the terrible sin of adultery.
After that, as is the case with all men who commit a sin, he had to
commit another to cover it up, so he laid plans to kill her husband, and
ordered him to be put in a position in the ranks of his army so that he
could be killed.

Months rolled away, and one day Nathan came into the palace of the king.
I can imagine that David was glad to see him. Nathan began to tell him
about two men who dwelt in a certain city. The one was rich, the other
poor; one had herds and flocks, and the other had only a little ewe lamb,
and he went on to tell how this rich man seized this ewe lamb, all that
the poor man had, and slew it. I can see the anger of David as it flashed
from his eye when he heard the story, and he cried: “As the Lord liveth,
the man that hath done this thing shall surely die.” He turned to Nathan,
and in tones of thunder demanded who the man was. “Thou art the man.”
This was the reply of Nathan. David had convicted himself. “The man who
did this thing shall die.” Then the Lord said: “I will raise up evil
against thee out of thine own house, because thou hast kept this thing
secret.”

Soon after this the hand of death was put upon that house. Not
only did death enter David’s house, but it was not long before his
eldest son committed adultery with his sister, and another committed
murder--murdered his own brothers, and went off into a foreign land into
exile. Then he got up a rebellion and drove the king from the throne, and
at last died and was buried like a dog, and they heaped stones upon his
resting place. “Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.” David
committed adultery, and so did his son; David committed murder, and his
son did the same. He was paid back in his own coin. He learned the truth
of this passage: “Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.”


ELIJAH.

Let us go to Carmel for a few minutes.

King Ahab had forsaken the God of Israel, and all the court people and
“upper ten” had followed his example. But there was an old prophet out
in the mountains, to whom God said: “Go to Ahab, and tell him the heavens
shall be shut up and there shall be no rain.”

Away he goes to the wicked king. He bursts in upon him like a clap of
thunder, gives his message and hurries away.

I suppose Ahab laughed at the old prophet. “What! No more rain? Why, the
fellow must be crazy.”

Pretty soon the weather gets very dry. The earth is parched, and begins
to crack open. The rivers have but little water in them, and the brooks
dry up altogether. The trees die; all the grass perishes, and the cattle
die, too. Famine--starvation--death! If rain does not come pretty soon,
there will not be a live man or woman left in all the kingdom.

One day the king was talking with the prophet, Obadiah.

You see, he did have one good man near him, along with all the prophets
of the false god. Almost anybody likes to have one good man within reach,
even if he is ever so bad. He may be wanted in a hurry some time.

“See here, Obadiah!” says King Ahab. “You go one way and I will go
another, and we will see if we can find some water somewhere.”

Obadiah has not gone a great way before Elijah bursts out upon him.

“O Elijah! Is that you? Ahab has been hunting for you everywhere, and
could not find you. He has sent off into all the kingdoms about, to have
them fetch you, if you were there.”

“Yes; I am here,” says Elijah. “You go and tell Ahab I want to see him.”

“I dare not do that,” says Obadiah, “for just as soon as I tell him you
are here, the Spirit will catch you away and take you off somewhere else,
and then the king will be very angry, and maybe he will kill me.”

“No,” says Elijah. “As the Lord liveth, I will meet Ahab face to face
this day.”

So Obadiah hurries off to find Ahab, and tells him he has seen the
prophet.

“What! Elijah?”

“Yes.”

“Why didn’t you bring him along?”

“He would not come. He says he wants you to come to him.”

Ahab was not used to have people talk that way to him, but he was anxious
to see the prophet, so he went. And when he sees Elijah he is very angry,
and asks:

“Art thou he that troubleth Israel?”

“Not at all,” says Elijah. “You are the man that is troubling
Israel--going off after Baal, and leading ever so many of the people
with you. Now, we have had enough of this sort of thing. Some people
are praying to God and some are praying to Baal, and we must have this
question settled. You just bring all your prophets and all the priests of
Baal up to Mount Carmel, and I also will come. We will make us each an
altar, and offer sacrifice on it; and the god that answereth by fire, let
Him be God.”

“Agreed,” says Ahab. And away he goes to tell his priests and get ready
for the trial.

I fancy that was a great day when this question was decided.

All the places of business were closed, and everybody was going up to
Mount Carmel. There must have been more people on Mount Carmel than there
are today at the races.[A] A better class of people, too.

    [A] This was said on Derby Day, in Opera House, Haymarket,
        London.

There were eight hundred and fifty of the prophets and priests of Baal
altogether. I fancy I can see them all, going up in a grand procession,
with the king in his chariot at their head.

“Fine-looking men, aren’t they?” says one man to another, as they go by.
“They will be able to do great things up there on the mountain.”

But there Elijah marched, all alone--a rough man, clad in the skins of
beasts, with a staff in his hand. No banners, no procession, no great men
in his train! But the man who could hold the keys of Heaven for three
years and six months was not afraid to be alone.

Now, Elijah says to the people: “How long will ye halt between two
opinions? Let the priests of Baal build them an altar and offer
sacrifice, but put no fire under, and I will do the same; and the god
that answereth by fire, let Him be God.”

So the priests of Baal build their altar.

I am sure that, if God had not held him back, Satan would have brought up
a little spark out of hell to set that sacrifice on fire. But God would
not let him.

Then they begin to pray: “O Baal, hear us! O Baal, hear us!”

Elijah might have said: “Why haven’t you prayed to Baal for water this
dry weather? You might just as well have asked him for water as for fire.”

After a long time they begin to get hoarse.

“You must pray louder than that, if you expect Baal to hear you,” says
the old prophet. “Maybe he is asleep. Pray louder, so as to wake him up.”

Poor fellows! They haven’t any voice left. So they begin to pray in
blood. They now cut themselves with knives, and lift their streaming
hands and arms to Baal. But no fire comes down.

It is getting toward sundown.

The prophet of the Lord builds an altar. Mind you, he does not have any
thing to do with the altar of Baal. He builds an entirely different one,
on the ruins of the altar of the Lord, which had been broken down.

“We will not have any one saying there is any trick about this thing,”
says the prophet. So they bring twelve barrels of water and pour over the
altar. I do not know how they managed to get so much water, but they did
it.

Then Elijah prays: “O God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob, let it be
known this day that Thou art God in Israel.”

He did not have to pray very loud. God heard him at once, and down came
the fire. It burnt up the sacrifice--burnt up the wood--burnt up the
water--burnt up the very stones of the altar. Jehovah is God; nobody can
halt any longer.

Ah, but some of you say: “I, too, would have decided for God if I had
been on Mount Carmel that day.” But Calvary is far more wonderful than
Carmel. The sacrifice of Christ on the cross is more wonderful than the
sacrifice which was burnt on that altar.


GIDEON.

I believe this man Gideon was called an enthusiast in the camp of Israel.
The very idea of his going out to meet a hundred thousand men with
pitchers and lanterns! How many people would have said: “The man has gone
clean mad.” Yes, he was an enthusiast; but the Lord was with him.

If we lean upon ourselves we will have failure, but if we lean upon the
arm of God we will see how swiftly God will give us victory. God wants
the glory, and no flesh shall glory in His stead. Look at what He said to
Gideon.

Gideon had called in an army of thirty-two thousand men. The Lord said
to him: “You have too many men. If I give you victory, Israel will vaunt
themselves against Me, saying: ‘My own hand hath saved me.’ You can not
work with so many, because I must have the glory. Just say to all that
are fearful: ‘Depart if you want to.’”

So Gideon proclaimed, in accordance with God’s command, saying:
“Whosoever is fearful and afraid, let him return and depart early from
Mount Gilead.” And there returned of the people twenty and two thousand,
and there remained ten thousand.

I can imagine that Gideon became a little scared at first. Only ten
thousand left! But the Lord came again, and said: “Gideon, you have
got too many men. If I work with them, you will take the glory.” So he
brought down the people unto the water, and the Lord said unto Gideon:
“Every one that lappeth of the water with his tongue, as a dog lappeth,
him shalt thou set by himself; likewise every one that boweth down upon
his knees to drink.”

Three hundred lapped and ninety-seven hundred wheeled out of line. I
can imagine they were like many Christians. What can God do with those
who are like those of Gideon’s army who were full of fears and doubts?
Look at the reduction in that great army. But three hundred men with the
Almighty! Three hundred men that side with God can be a power for God.
Three hundred like Gideon’s men will move any city. What a routing there
was before that band! They fly like chaff before the wind. Do not call
any thing small of God.


ITTAI.

I will read a few verses in the fifteenth chapter of Second Samuel,
beginning at the nineteenth verse:

“Then said the king to Ittai, the Gittite: ‘Wherefore goest thou also
with us? Return to thy place, and abide with the king; for thou art a
stranger, and also an exile.

“‘Whereas, thou camest but yesterday, should I this day make thee go up
and down with us? Seeing I go whither I may, return thou, and take back
thy brethren. Mercy and truth be with thee.’

“And Ittai answered the king, and said: ‘As the Lord liveth, and as my
lord the king liveth, surely in what place my lord the king shall be,
whether in death or life, even there also will thy servant be.’

“And David said to Ittai: ‘Go, and pass over.’ And Ittai, the Gittite,
passed over, and all his men, and all the little ones that were with them.

“And all the country wept with a loud voice, and all the people passed
over. The king also himself passed over the brook Kidron, and all the
people passed over, toward the way of the wilderness.”

What must have been the feeling of David when he got outside the city and
found this foreigner and stranger out there with six hundred men, ready
and willing to go with him! He had had three men who sat at his table,
and in the hour of trial, in the hour of trouble, they had deserted him.
It is in the time of darkness that we find out our friends. You find then
who are your friends.

Now, David was in trouble, and here was this Ittai standing right by him.
How that must have cheered the heart of the king! He had been driven
from the throne by Absalom, and the whole kingdom seemed to be going
with Absalom. Absalom and those who were with him were planning to take
the life of David, but here we find this stranger--this man Ittai--just
following David; and when David told him to go back, see what he says. I
think it is one of the sweetest things in the whole life of David:

“Then said the king to Ittai, the Gittite: ‘Wherefore goest thou also
with us? Return to thy place, and abide with the king; for thou art a
stranger, and also an exile.

“‘Whereas, thou camest but yesterday, should I this day make thee go up
and down with us? Seeing I go whither I may, return thou, and take back
thy brethren. Mercy and truth be with thee.’”

Here was a man who was attached to a person. That was the point I wanted
to call your attention to. We are living, I think, in the day of shams.
There are a good many people who are attached to creeds, denominations
and churches. They are attached to this and to that, instead of a person.
Creeds and churches are all right in their places, but if a man puts
them in the place of the Savior and the personal Christ, then they are
but snares. He would be willing to give up every thing but Christ in the
hour of trouble, and if he is attached to Christ he will be able to say:
“Wherever Thou goest I go.” David had nothing to offer this man. There he
was--barefooted and leaving the throne. Ittai was attached to the man.

David was every thing to Ittai, and life was nothing. No man had better
friends than David had in his day. What we want is to be attached to the
Lord Jesus Christ as Ittai was attached to David.


JACOB.

The key to all Jacob’s difficulties will be found in the twentieth
chapter of Matthew. It is the story of the laborers in the vineyard.
The thought is in the second verse. The first men hired agreed to the
bargain. The men would not go until the owner of the vineyard had made a
bargain with them. He told them that he would pay them what was right.
They got a penny. He gave them the lawful wages. They probably asked:
“And is this all you are going to give us?”

Jacob was all the time making bargains.

The Christians who are making bargains with the Lord do not get as much
as those who trust Him. It does not pay to make bargains with the Lord.

Jacob is a twin brother of most of us. Where you find one Joseph or one
Daniel you will find a hundred Jacobs. We are not willing, all of us, to
take God at His word and trust Him. There is a strong contrast between
the character of Joseph and Jacob. The one trusted God implicitly, but
Jacob wanted to trust Him no farther than he could see God. There would
have been a great deal of murmuring if Jacob had been thrown into jail in
Egypt.

No doubt Jacob got much of his weakness from his mother. There was a
division in that home. Isaac favored Esau, and Rebekah favored Jacob.
Such dissensions are just the thing to stir up the old Adam in the man.
A mother and a father have no right to take this course. Rebekah plans
continually to keep Jacob at home. The very thing that Rebekah tries to
achieve, in that she fails. By nature Esau was the better of the two. If
such a mean and contemptible nature as Jacob’s can be saved, then there
is hope for all of us.

The Lord promised to Jacob from the bottom of the ladder what he should
have. Jacob gets up and says: “If God will be with me and keep and
clothe me, then shall the Lord be my God.” What a low and contemptible
idea he had! God had promised him all from Dan to Beersheba.

That is the difficulty with the people at the present time. If God will
bless us in our basket and store, we shall have Him for our God. We find
Jacob after this in Haran, driving bargains all the time, and the worst
of it is he gets beat every time. He had to work seven years for his
wife, and then gets another woman in her place. He is paid back in his
own coin. We must not think that God will allow us to deceive without
punishing us for it. Jacob forgot all the vows which he made at Bethel,
but God did not forget His. Some of God’s promises are unconditional. The
promise which He made at Bethel was unconditional.

God chose Jacob rather than Esau. Some people say that God hated Esau
before he was born. This is not the teaching of Scripture, even though
one of the minor prophets long years after mentioned it. God says to
Jacob after he had been in Haran for so many years: “I am the God of
Bethel. Arise and dwell there.”

Jacob ought to have been proud, and should have left Haran like a prince,
but instead he steals away like a thief. He starts off, and his uncle and
father-in-law pursue. God took care of him. God was determined to keep
His vows, and there is no doubt that, had not God interfered, Jacob would
have been slain.

We find that Jacob stays behind, like a miserable coward, after he had
sent his effects away. A man out of communication with God is a coward
always.

There was a man who wrestled with Jacob. He was Christ. When did Jacob
prevail? When his thigh was out of joint all he could do was to hold on
and get the blessing. The man who is the lowest down is the man whom God
lifts up the highest. The man that has the greatest humility will be the
most exalted.

A great many say that Jacob was a different man. Would to God his thigh
had been left out of joint, so that there was no more of the flesh in
him. The next thing, we find Jacob and Esau embracing, and we would
suppose that he would be filled with gratitude. But no. He goes down to
Shechem and builds an altar and calls it by a high-sounding name. Jacob
in Shechem, with this altar with a high-sounding name, was no better than
he was in Haran without an altar. He built an altar, finally, at Bethel.
He said that he would go to Bethel and build an altar to his God, as if
the Shechem altar was no altar. He called it El-Bethel. Just the moment
he came to Bethel the Lord God met him.

The next thing we hear is the saddest episode in the career of Jacob--the
death of Rachel, his favorite wife. His sons go back to Shechem, and
hunt up the old idols. His sons bring him back news from there that his
most dearly loved son was dead. Do you see how Jacob begins to reap the
harvest of the sins of his early days? For twenty long years he mourned
that beloved boy. He deceived his own father, and his own sons, in turn,
deceived him.

What a bitter life! What was Jacob’s dying testimony to Pharaoh? It would
take ten thousand Jacobs to get one convert like Pharaoh. “Few and evil,”
said Jacob, “have my days been.” He started with a lie in his mouth. He
died in exile. He died in Egypt--not in the land which God had promised
him. He would not let God choose for him. He was saved by fire--or, as
Job said, by the skin of his teeth.


JACOB’S SONS.

Look at the sons of Jacob. Look at them when they took away their
brother, and after they had delivered him into slavery see them coming
back. How much they must have suffered with their secret during those
twenty years! What misery they must have endured as they looked, during
all those years, at their old father sorrowing for his son, Joseph! They
knew the boy had not been killed. They knew he was in slavery.

For twenty years the sin was covered up, but at last it came back upon
them. God had, in the meantime, been doing every thing for Joseph. He had
raised him nearly to the throne of Egypt.

A famine struck the land of the father, and the old man sent his sons
down into Egypt to purchase corn. God was at work. He was making these
men bring their own sin home to themselves. Their consciences smote them,
and they confessed, in the presence of Joseph, that their sin had found
them out. Twenty years after it was committed that sin was resurrected,
and they were brought face to face with it. “He that covereth his sin
shall not prosper.”


JOHN THE BAPTIST.

I want to call your attention to John, the forerunner of Christ. On
hearing the news of the death of the king Joseph brings Jesus back to
Nazareth, and there He remained for thirty years.

I once read of the founder of the Russian Empire going down to a Dutch
sea port as a stranger and in disguise, that he might learn how to build
ships and return home and impart this knowledge to his own subjects.
People have wondered at that. But this is a far greater wonder, that the
Prince of Glory should come down here and learn the carpenter’s trade.
He was not only the son of a carpenter, but He was a carpenter Himself.
His father was a carpenter, and He was a carpenter, too, for we read that
they brought it up against Him that He was a carpenter. We read:

“And when He was come into His own country, He taught them in their
synagogue, insomuch that they were astonished, and said: ‘Whence hath
this man this wisdom and these mighty works? Is not this the carpenter’s
son?’”

Right here is one lesson that we ought to learn, and that is, when Christ
was here He was an industrious man. I have often said on this platform
that I have never known a lazy man to be converted. If one ever was
converted, he soon gave up his laziness. I tell you that laziness does
not belong to Christ’s Kingdom. I do not believe a man would have a lazy
hair in his head if he was converted to the Lord Jesus Christ. If a man
has really been born of the Spirit of Christ, he is not lazy. He wants
to find something to do, and no kind of manual labor is degrading. It
is honorable. If our Master, who is the Prince of Peace and the King
of Glory, could leave Heaven and come down here and work as a village
carpenter, let us not think that manual labor is beneath our notice. Let
us be willing to go out and work. If we can not find what we want, let us
do what we can. If we can earn only twenty-five cents a day, let us earn
that rather than do nothing. We not only want something to occupy our
hands, but also our minds.

But this is not the point of the lecture this morning. I want to go back
to those two wonderful men.

The thirty years have rolled away, and it is now time that this wonderful
Messiah should come unto the nation. The Scriptures have been fulfilled,
and the first sound we hear of His coming is that strange voice crying in
the wilderness.

Those thirty years that have just expired were as nothing to the nation.
Undoubtedly, the rumors about those two children, which created a great
sensation at the time, had died out. The story of the shepherds on the
plains of Bethlehem had gone out of popular recollection--faded away. The
story of this child being brought into the Temple, and that old man and
that old woman coming in there just at the time--that wonderful scene had
faded away. Many who were in the Temple at that time had gone. Zacharias
and Elizabeth had passed away, and the Roman Empire had also died, after
sending out a decree that the country should be taxed. Herod was also
dead.

A great change had taken place in thirty years. You just carry your minds
back through thirty years, and see how many who stood with you thirty
years ago--with whom you were acquainted--have gone, and are sleeping in
their graves.

If the Holy Ghost had not come after Christ went to Heaven, the story of
His death and His resurrection would have been forgotten as soon as His
birth and His life. No doubt about that. It is that which has kept the
memory of Christ in the world, and His name so fresh and fragrant. The
Holy Ghost has come down here to keep in our minds the glory and beauty
of Christ. Now, we find His forerunner comes.

Matthew says: “In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the
wilderness.”

Mark says: “The voice of one crying in the wilderness.”

Luke says: “The word of God came unto John, the son of Zacharias, in the
wilderness.”

John’s account is: “There was a man sent from God, whose name was John.”

The last prophet had closed up his prophecy by saying that John should
come before the Messiah, and that he should be the herald who would come
to introduce Him. Now, these four evangelists all take up their pens, and
they all notice it.

You know, if you let any four men write up any one thing, they will
not all write about it alike. Why, when men went to the Centennial, at
Philadelphia, not any four of them wrote about it alike. Let a man come
in here, and let any four of us look at him. One will get a side view
of him, one a front view, and so on; and no two of the four will see him
alike.

So these evangelists wrote about John, but not one of the four used the
same language. You know, it was said he was to be like Elijah. Well, he
looked like him, dressed like him, and his preaching was like him.

He came suddenly and unexpectedly upon the world, and it was not long
before his voice rang clear through the whole nation, and the whole
nation was stirred. He stood between the two dispensations. He was the
last prophet the new dispensation was to have. They had had some mighty
prophets--wonderful men; but this man was to be the last one.

Now, we find this man standing there, as it were, between these two
dispensations; and when he commenced to preach his preaching was very
much like that of Elijah. He was a reformer. His cry was: “Repent!
Reform!”

But if he had stopped there his reform would have died out with him. A
great many reformations die out with the reformers because they cry out:
“Repent! Repent! Reform! Reform!” but they do not get any farther than
that. Thank God, John had something else to tell them. He did not stop
at “Repent! Repent!” He kept telling them there was One coming mightier
than himself. Undoubtedly that was what thrilled the nation. Talk about
sensation! There was never a nation moved as that one nation was moved by
John the Baptist.

In these days, if certain persons want to stir a town or city, they need
to influence the leading men of that city to stand around them, help
them and pray for them. But there stood John the Baptist, preaching in
the wilderness, without any influence of your committee. He did not have
Mr. Sankey to sing for him to draw out the people. He stood there upon
the banks of the Jordan alone, preaching the glorious tidings that the
Messiah was coming after him, and he probably was preaching this to the
lowest beggar in the land.

There John was in the wilderness, dressed like his predecessor, Elijah.
There he was, preaching in the wilderness; and just bear in mind, it was
not any milk-and-water preaching. He gave the message just as God gave it
to him. I suppose, if he had some of the Christians of the present day
there, they would have said: “Do not be so bold; be mild about it. Don’t
you know you must use a little moderation about this? Come, John! If you
talk against these Pharisees they will cut your head off.”

But that did not enter his mind. It was not what they wanted. It was
what God gave him to deliver; and if any man just takes the message and
delivers it as God gives it to him, I tell you God will stand by him.
He is going to succeed--mind that. He may be unsuccessful at first; his
labor may seem to be unprofitable for a time, and people may turn away.
But the time will come when his words will cut deep down into their
hearts and lead them to salvation.

Then the people began to tremble. They had no newspapers then to print
the sermons; they had no telegraph wires to flash them over the country.
But one man just took the matter up and passed it to the next, and so
on, and very soon it was spread over the whole country.

“There he is,” they said, “dressed just like Elijah, with his leathern
girdle and his raiment of camel’s hair.” He comes out about 9 o’clock in
the morning, and there he stands on the banks of the Jordan, and there
he continues his talk. Day after day he is seen there, and his cry is:
“Repent! Repent!” And that was his appeal.

Well, it is not very long before every city, town and village has heard
of this wonder. John preached the law just as it was given him, and as a
specimen of his preaching just read this. See how bold he was:

“Then said he to the multitude that came forth to be baptized of him: ‘O
generation of vipers!’”

O generation of vipers! Pretty hard talk, wasn’t it? I don’t know as you
could get many people into this Tabernacle by such talk as that. But he
knew what he was doing. He knew they hated his Master. He knew that,
away down in their hearts, they were at enmity with God. Read a little
farther, and see what he said:

“O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to
come?

“Bring forth, therefore, fruits worthy of repentance, and begin not to
say within yourselves: ‘We have Abraham to our father.’ For I say unto
you that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.”

He knew the men pretty well. I do not know where he had been all these
thirty years. But he had found out the human heart. He had found out
human nature pretty well. And those people undoubtedly said: “We belong
to the seed of Abraham. We are the descendants of Abraham. We do not
need to be converted. We have got the law from Moses, and we obey that.
Let these poor dogs of Gentiles be converted. It is not for us.”

And that is just the doctrine now.

“We do not need to be converted. John a first-rate reformer? Oh, yes;
but that does not touch us. We go to church regularly. It is for these
publicans and harlots. That kind of preaching is not for us. Oh, it is
all good enough--all very good.”

And no doubt they would put up a Tabernacle for them--for the harlots and
drunkards to go to.

“Oh, no! That preaching is not for us. It is good enough for them, but we
do not need to go. We are the seed of Abraham. We belong to Moses, and we
are not such bad men. What do you mean by conversion? We do not need to
be born again. What do we need to be born again for? We pay our debts. We
are good men.”

See? That same old spirit. Eighteen hundred years have rolled away, and
you find human nature the same. John knew them pretty well.

“I say unto you that God is able of these stones to raise up children
unto Abraham.”

You need not flatter yourselves that you are better than the other
people. God can make children right out of these stones, and make them
the seed of Abraham.

“And now, also, the ax is laid unto the root of the tree; every tree,
therefore, which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into
the fire.

“And the people asked him, saying: ‘What shall we do, then?’”

See! They had an inquiry meeting, right there on the banks of the Jordan.

“He answereth, and saith unto them: ‘He that hath two coats, let him
impart to him that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him do likewise.’

“Then came, also, publicans to be baptized, and said unto him: ‘Master,
what shall we do?’

“And he said unto them: ‘Exact no more than that which is appointed you.’

“And the soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying: ‘And what shall we
do?’ And he said unto them: ‘Do violence to no man, neither accuse any
falsely, and be content with your wages.’”

Now, that was his preaching up to the time that Christ came. As I said
before, it was: “Repent! Repent! Reform! Reform!” And you may tell these
men they ought to do better; but if you do not tell them how, you can not
save them. Now, we find here, in this fifteenth verse, that they were
looking for something more:

“And as the people were in expectation, and all men mused in their hearts
of John, whether he were the Christ or not, John answered, saying unto
them all: ‘I, indeed, baptize you with water; but One mightier than I
cometh, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose. He shall
baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire.

“‘Whose fan is in His hand, and He will thoroughly purge His floor, and
will gather the wheat into his garner; but the chaff He will burn with
fire unquenchable.’

“And many other things in his exhortation preached he unto the people.”

Now, what a chance there was for John to have let self come in! When
people were wondering in their hearts if he was not the true Messiah--if
he was not Christ--he might have been tempted to come out and say he was
more than himself--that he was Christ. But there was this commendable
trait about John: He never preached up self.

He was preparing the nation to receive the Lord of Glory. He had come
merely to introduce Him. He was nothing. Just as a man comes and
introduces a friend to you, he barely introduces him and steps aside. He
does not put himself forward.

So John introduces the Son of God, and then begins to fade away, and soon
is gone. He had not come to introduce himself, but to preach Christ.

And let me say, right here, that this is the very height of preaching.
When they begin to wonder who he is, he just comes right out and says: “I
am not Jesus. I am only just one sent to introduce Him. I have come for
that purpose. I have not come to preach up myself, but Him that is mighty
to save.”

And then we find that while his star was just at its height, while he was
just about at the zenith of his glory, while people were flocking in from
the towns and villages to hear him, the chief rulers of Jerusalem send
down a deputation to inquire what this religion meant. They appointed
some influential men to find him out, and they said to him: “We have been
sent by the chief priest of Jerusalem to find out who you are. Are you
Christ?” And John answered: “No.” “Well, who are you? Are you this man
or that man?” “No.” “Are you this prophet or that prophet?” “No.” “Well,
who are you?”

Did he say: “I am Jesus”? No. “Merely Mr. Nobody--merely a voice crying
in the wilderness.”

What a message that was to send back to Jerusalem! He was not trying to
put himself forward. He was all the time trying to get out of self. In
the nineteenth verse and first chapter of John we read:

“And this is the record of John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites
from Jerusalem to ask him: ‘Who art thou?’

“And he confessed, and denied not; but confessed: ‘I am not the Christ.’

“And they asked him: ‘What, then? Art thou Elias?’ And he saith: ‘I am
not.’ ‘Art thou the prophet?’ And he answered: ‘No.’

“Then said they unto him: ‘Who art thou? That we may give an answer to
them that sent us. What sayest thou of thyself?’

“He said: ‘I am the voice of One crying in the wilderness. Make straight
the way of the Lord, as said the prophet, Esaias.’

“And they which were sent were of the Pharisees.

“And they asked him, and said unto him: ‘Why baptize thou, then, if thou
be not Christ, nor Elias, neither that prophet?’

“John answered them, saying: ‘I baptize with water; but there standeth
One among you whom ye know not. He it is who, coming after me, is
preferred before me, whose shoe’s latchet I am unworthy to unloose.’

“These things were done in Bethabara, beyond Jordan, where John was
baptizing.”

Now, this was the day, I say, when John was at the very zenith of his
glory; but see how noble he stood. He did not take any honor or glory to
himself, and in two different places he declared that he knew not this
Stranger that he was the herald of--his Messiah.

Some are trying to make out that this was all planned by John and Jesus,
that he should say he did not know Him. But he declares in two places
that he did not know Him. They were brought up in two extremes of the
country--one in the northern part of it, Nazareth, and the other at
Hebron.

Talk about eloquence! John was one of the most eloquent men, I suppose,
that ever lived. He was the herald of God, and when the nation was in a
terrible state of excitement, and the chief priests of Jerusalem, and
even the king himself, went to hear him.

There he stood on the banks of the Jordan. I can see the men and women
on both sides of the river--little children, mothers with their babes
in their arms--all intensely excited and leaning forward to catch what
he says. “Now,” says John, “if you believe what I say, that if you have
broken the law given at Sinai you have sinned, to be forgiven you must
repent and come down into this Jordan, and I will baptize you in the name
of the God of Hebron.”

The people went in by scores and hundreds, and there he baptized them.
And as he stood there baptizing them I can imagine about twenty thousand
people hanging upon his lips. There was a man came down through the
crowd. I can imagine that John was a man who looked as though he was more
like a mountain eagle, but his wings seemed to droop. That eye which
had been so keen and so severe on the Israelites when he called them a
generation of vipers became lusterless, his face fell and he shook his
head, as this Stranger came.

I suppose, as He came walking along toward John, God revealed the fact to
him and said: “This is My Son. This is the Savior of the world. This is
the Prince of Peace.” And when John saw Him he quailed before Him, and he
said: “I have need to be baptized of Thee.”

What excitement! How it must have thrilled the audience as John drew
back and said: “I have need to be baptized of Thee.” John knew Him. John
at once recognized Him. He knew He was the promised One of the law.
John said: “I have need to be baptized of Thee, and comest Thou to me?”
But Jesus said unto him: “Suffer it to be so now, that the law may be
fulfilled.” Now, what excitement as these two men went down into the
river together!

Oh, if Jordan could speak it could tell some wonderful stories! Wonderful
scenes have taken place there. Naaman had gone into that river and
washed, and had come forth clean. Elijah, going up with his mantle,
struck the water and went over dry-shod, as also did Elisha after Elijah
had ascended. But a more wonderful scene was taking place in Jordan than
ever took place before. It was of transcendent interest to all mankind.

Our Lord was going down into Jordan to be baptized, and He was going to
come up on resurrection ground. So He goes down with John the Baptist,
and the moment He was baptized and came up out of the water the heavens
were opened unto Him, and the Spirit of God descended upon Him like a
dove, and alighted upon Him. Heaven witnessed the scene. God the Father
spoke then. He broke the silence of ages. The God of the Old Testament
was the Christ of the New. And he heard a voice from Heaven, saying:
“This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.”

Some one says that was the first time God could look down on the world
since Adam fell and say that He was well pleased. In Hebrews, tenth
chapter and seventh verse, we read:

“Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of Me) to do Thy
will, O God.”

He was the Son that was born above. The heavens opened and the Holy Ghost
descended upon Him. The Spirit of the Lord came down on Him, and God owns
Him and recognizes Him.

Now, there is another thought to which I want to call your attention.
John’s preaching changed. But he was not like many men of the present
day, who want to reform the world without Christ, who set a good example
and tell men to sign pledges and to do this or that, and to trust in
their own strength.

The moment John got his eye on Christ he had one text: “Behold the Lamb
of God that taketh away the sins of the world.” That is how you are going
to get rid of your sins. Says John: “I bear record of this in the Son of
God.” And he told his disciples: “Now, you follow Him. Go with Him.”

One afternoon, as he sat there with his disciples, he said: “Behold
the Lamb of God!” And they left him to follow Jesus--two of his own
disciples. I tell you that is something which you do not like to do--to
make your friends leave you; to preach them away--your own congregation.
But now this man begins to ask his disciples to leave him. “Why,” said
he, “I tell you I am not worthy to just unloose His shoes. He is more
worthy than I am. Follow Him.” He began to preach up Christ. “He must
increase; I must decrease.”

Some of his disciples came to him one day and said: “You know that Man
you baptized over there in the Jordan? Well, more men are coming to Him
than are coming to you.” That was jealousy--envy rankling in those men’s
bosoms. But what did John say? “I told you that I was not He. Why, He
must increase, and I must decrease. That’s right, I would rather see the
crowd flocking to hear Him.”

John, I think, was terribly abused by some one. He was cast into prison.
Then he sent two of his disciples to inquire of Christ if He was the true
Messiah, or must he look for another. I do not know, but I have an idea
that he wanted his disciples to leave him and go over to Jesus. So he
called two of his most influential disciples and told them: “Now, you go
and ask Him if He is the true Messiah.” I can not believe in John’s faith
wavering; but, if he was wavering, he took the very best way, and sent
those men to ask the Savior.

I see his deputation arrive, and when Jesus had finished preaching these
disciples come up and say: “Our master has sent us to ask if You are the
true Messiah? Or, shall he look for another?”

Jesus goes on healing the sick, causing the lame to leap, giving sight to
the blind, making the deaf to hear, and after He had gone on performing
these miracles He said to John’s messengers: “You go back and tell your
master what you have seen and what you have heard. Go back and tell John
that the blind see; that the deaf hear; that the lame walk, and that the
poor have the Gospel preached to them.”

When John heard that, in prison, it settled all his doubts. His disciples
believed, and the poor had the Gospel preached to them. That was the
test, and then John’s disciples, one after another, left him. And now
we find him thrown into prison. There he is, in prison--awaiting his
appointed time.

Just bear in mind that God had sent him. His work was done. He had only
just come to announce the Savior--only for that object. Some think that
Christ’s treatment of John was rather hard--in fact, harsh; but the
greatest tribute ever paid to any man was paid by Jesus to John.

“But what went ye out to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they
that wear soft clothing are in kings’ houses.

“But what went ye out to see? A prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and more
than a prophet.

“For this is he of whom it is written: ‘Behold, I send my messenger
before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.’

“Verily, I say unto you: ‘Among them that are born of women there has not
risen a greater than John the Baptist; notwithstanding he that is least
in the kingdom of Heaven is greater than he.’”

There was none greater than this same John. Our Savior knew that John was
going first. He knew that He was soon to die, and that John would have
to come to Him; that they would soon be together in Glory, and then they
could talk matters over; that John must sink out of sight, and the Lord
of Glory must be the central object.

Jesus and John were like the Sun and Moon in comparison with the stars.
All the prophets were like the stars in comparison with those two men.
There was no prophet like John. None born of woman was greater. Moses was
a mighty prophet. Elijah was the son of thunder, and a great and mighty
prophet; and so was Elisha. But they were not to be compared with John.

What a character! He lost sight of himself entirely. Christ was
uppermost; Christ was the all-in-all with him. He was beheaded outside
the Promised Land. He was buried in Moab, somewhere near where Moses
was laid away. The first and last prophet of that nation were buried
near together, and there they lie, outside the Promised Land; but their
bodies, by-and-by, will be resurrected, and they will be the grandest and
most glorious in God’s kingdom.


JOSHUA.

Joshua was a man who walked by faith, and you will find the key to his
character in three words--courage, obedience and faith.

Courage, obedience and faith. And he dared to be in the minority.

Now, friends, there are very few men at the present time who like to be
in the minority. They always want to be in the majority. They want to go
with the crowd. But when a man has laid hold of the Divine nature of God,
and has become a product of the Divine nature, he is willing then to go
against the crowd of the world and be numbered with the minority.

Where Joshua met the God of Israel first we are not told. We do not catch
a glimpse of him until the man is about forty years old. The first sight
we get of Joshua is as he comes up out of Egypt. We are told that after
Moses had struck the rock in Horeb and the children of Israel had drank
the water that came out of that rock--and that rock was typical of Christ
and of God’s pure throne--Amalek came out to fight them, and after they
had got a drink of this pure water they were willing to meet him.

We find that Joshua’s first battle was successful, and that his last one
was successful. He never knew what defeat was. He was successful because
he believed in the Lord God of Heaven--because he had perfect faith in
God. Moses went up into the mountain to pray, and while he was praying
Joshua was down fighting Amalek. And when Moses held up his hand Israel
prevailed, and when he let down his hand Amalek prevailed.

“And Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands--the one on the one side and the
other on the other side--and his hands were steady until the going down
of the sun.”

His hands were up until Amalek was defeated.

There is only one thing against Joshua. He was opposed to the preaching
of Eldad and Aminidab. He did not like to see Eldad and Aminidab out
there preaching in the camp, because they did not belong to the Apostolic
body. So he says to Moses: “I wish you would rebuke Eldad and Aminidab
for preaching in the camp. I do not want them to preach there.”

But Moses said: “No! I will not rebuke Eldad and Aminidab. That’s just
what we want. I wish to God there were more of them.”

After Moses rebuked Joshua we never hear him complaining any more about
Eldad and Aminidab. That is the only thing on record against him. The
next thing we hear of is the matter of those twelve spies, and I will
pass over that. You remember how they came back, and Joshua and Caleb
were the only two out of the twelve that dared to bring in a minority
report. But now the forty years’ wilderness journey is over, and during
all those forty years you can not find any place where Joshua or Caleb
ever murmured or complained. They were not of that kind.

Now, as I said, the forty years’ wilderness journey is over, and Moses is
about to leave. He went up into Mount Nebo, and “God kissed away his soul
and buried him.”

Then Joshua was commanded to take charge of the army. The word of the
Lord came to him, saying: “Joshua, arise and go over this Jordan. Moses,
my servant, is dead.”

There was no president, no general, no marshal about it. There was no
title at all, but just merely: “Joshua, arise and go over this Jordan.”
Now, Joshua just obeyed, and here you will find the secret of his
wonderful success. He did just what the Lord told him to do. He did not
stand, like many people would have done, and say: “I don’t know how I
am going to get these people over. Hadn’t you better wait, Lord, until
the next day? How am I to get these three million people over this angry
flood? Hadn’t we better wait until the waters recede?”

No! Joshua did not say that. He had got his command from God: “Arise and
go.” When the Lord gave orders, that was enough. He had got His word, and
he brings these children of Israel down in sight of the swollen stream.
Faith must be tried. God will not have people whom He can not try.

Joshua brings them there in three days, in sight of the angry flood, with
not a word of murmuring. If he had brought them there forty years before,
what murmuring there would have been! We will get trained--every one of
us.

They had had their faith tried in those forty years in the wilderness,
and now they murmured not. There was not a word of complaint. But forty
years before they would have asked, when they had got opposite Jericho:
“What is He going to do? How are we going to get over? We’ve got to have
a bridge or a pontoon. And even if we get over, they will see us and
defeat us. They will slay us here on the bank of Jordan. Guess we had
better turn around and go back.”

That is about what they would have said, what they would have tried, and
what they would have done forty years before. But now Joshua tells the
people that the priests are to walk out in front of them, and that the
moment the priests touched the water--the moment the soles of their feet
touched the water--the water was to be cut off.

There was faith for you! When those seven men took up the ark God was
with them, and the moment the soles of their feet touched the water the
waters were cut off, and they passed into the middle of the stream and
put down the ark.

That ark represented the Almighty. He was in the ark, with the ark right
there in the midst of death--for Jordan is death and judgment--right in
the middle of the stream. He held that stream in the palm of His hand.
And now the people pass beyond--three millions of them.

You can hear their solemn tread. Not a word said on their march through
death and judgment until Joshua led them on to Resurrection Ground. After
he had got them all over, he told twelve men--one from each tribe--to
take each a stone and set them up where the priests stood, so that when
their children asked “What mean ye by these stones?” they could tell how
the Almighty brought them through dangers into the Promised Land.

Now, after they had placed their stones, the ark was brought up out of
the Jordan, and the waters rolled off. Instead of moving right on at
once to Jericho, the children of Israel stopped to keep the Passover.
They were in no hurry. They were willing to worship God. They kept the
Passover, and after that they started for Jericho. Jericho was shut off,
undoubtedly, and surely the hearts of those people were filled with fear.
Here the children of Israel had come to their country and their God had
brought them through the Red Sea with an out-stretched arm. Surely there
was a strange God among them. Jericho had no such God as that. He had
defended them and led them, and had given them light and life after that.

But now Joshua just takes a walk around the walls of Jericho. God had
ordered him to take it, and he must. And as he was walking around,
viewing the walls of Jericho, all at once a man stood right in front of
him with a drawn sword right over him, and God said: “No man can be able
to stand before you all the days of your life.” And Joshua steps right up
to him, and asks: “Art thou for us or for our adversaries?” The stranger
answered: “I am captain of God’s host, come to lead you to victory.”

Then Joshua fell on his face, and God talked with him. How many men
of the present time would have laughed at Joshua if they had been in
Jericho! How much sport they would have made of him! If there had been a
Jericho Herald, what articles would have come out! The idea of taking the
city in that way! The ark was to come out, and the priests were to blow
rams’ horns. That was very absurd, wasn’t it? Rams’ horns!

Well, the seventh day came, and they were up quite early in the morning.
Here were these seven men blowing their rams’ horns, and the people going
around for the seventh time. At the end of the seventh time Joshua says:
“Shout, for the Lord has given you the city.” They shout, and down tumble
the walls of the city. Then they went up and entered Jericho, and every
man, woman and child of that city perished. God had given the order, and
His commands were obeyed.

Now they move on to Ai. You know, after a victory is gained over some
large town they attack and take the little outlying towns. So, in this
case, they moved right on to Ai. Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, and
they came back and told him that just a few thousand men could take Ai;
and they go up and are repulsed. Then Joshua rends his clothes and falls
on his face, and asks God what the fault was. He knew the fault was in
the camp--not God’s.

When they went into Jericho they were told not to touch one solitary
thing. But there was Acham, who saw a nice garment--perhaps he thought
it would be a nice dress for his wife. He also saw two hundred shekels
of silver and a wedge of gold, and he coveted all these things and took
them. He hid them, but he could not conceal them. He had to confess that
he had sinned against the Lord God of Israel. Those men of Ai were so
humbled that they could not stand before the Lord.

After leaving Ai, we read that Joshua came to Mount Ebal, and there a
wonderful thing took place. On one side, on the slope of Mount Gerizim,
were half of the children of Israel, and on the other side, on the slope
of Mount Ebal, were the other half. There were three million people
gathered there, and the whole law of Moses was read over to them.

It was a solemn sight. Moreover, all the law of God was read--not a
part, but the whole. Joshua read the blessings and cursings. He did not
stand up there like some one reading a moral essay and say that they
must be good for they were going into the Promised Land; that there were
blessings for them, and said nothing about the curses. No; he did not do
that. He read all.

It says here, in the eighth chapter: “And all Israel and their elders and
officers and their judges stood on this side the ark and on that side,
before the priests, the Levites, which bore the ark of the covenant of
the Lord, as well the stranger as he that was born among them; half of
them over against Mount Gerizim and half of them over against Mount Ebal,
as Moses, the servant of the Lord, had commanded before, that they should
bless the people of Israel. And afterward he read all the words of the
law, the blessings and cursings, according to all that is written in the
book of the law.”

Now, mark that. “He read all the words of the law, the blessings and
cursings, according to all that is written in the book of the law.” If
Joshua had been like many of the present day, he would have said to
himself: “I will read the blessings, but not the cursings. I do not
believe God is going to curse a man if he does wrong, so I will read
the blessings and omit the cursings.” But, thank God, he read the whole
law--the blessings and the cursings. He did not keep back any thing. “And
there was not a word of all that Moses commanded which Joshua read not.”
Thank God for such a man! That is the kind of men we want nowadays--men
who will not cut the Bible to pieces like the king who took out his
penknife and said: “I don’t like that; cut that out. I don’t like this;
cut this out.” So they cut and slashed the Bible until very little was
left.

The thirty-third verse of the eighth chapter says they were all
there--“as well the stranger as he that was born among them.” You see,
Joshua made no distinction. He read to the stranger as well as to those
that were of the children of Israel. It was all read.

And now Joshua is ready to move on. The law had been read, they had
worshiped their God, and they were ready to move on. Undoubtedly the
nations throughout that land had heard how this solemn assembly had met
on the mountain side and the law had been read. Now they are ready to
move on again. They had been there about three days.

Some one now comes to Joshua with startling news. The messenger begins
with the question: “Joshua, have you heard that there is a confederacy
formed to oppose you? Instead of meeting one man you are to meet five.
They are coming down from the mountains with great regiments of giants.
Why, the mountains are full of the sons of Anak--full of giants--and some
of them are six feet high. Why, they are so big that they would scare our
own men to death. Why, one man came out and just shook his little finger
at our men, and scared them out of their lives. There was not a man who
dared to meet them. The whole land is full of giants. Do you know that
they have formed a confederacy? Five kings are coming down against you
with hordes of these giants.”

I see the old warrior. He does not tremble at all. He had received the
word of God: “Joshua, be of good courage. No man shall be able to stand
against you.” He moved on in his godly armor and in the name of his
God, and he routed his adversaries. The hour was growing late, and he
commanded Sun and Moon to stand still, and they obeyed him. So there were
two days in one. He found the five kings hid away in a cave, and he took
them out and hanged them. He took thirty-one kings and kingdoms. He just
took that land by faith.

Now, some people ask: “What right had he to come over and take that
land?” If you will read the fourth verse of the ninth chapter of
Deuteronomy, you will see what right he had. “Speak not thou in thine
heart, after that the Lord thy God hath cast them out from before thee,
saying: ‘For my righteousness the Lord hath brought me in to possess this
land.’ But, for the wickedness of these nations, the Lord doth drive them
out from before thee.”

That is why He drove them out. Their cup of iniquity was filled, and God
just dashed it to pieces. When any nation’s cup of iniquity is full, God
sweeps them away.

Now, mark the Scripture: “Not for thy righteousness or for the
uprightness of thine heart dost thou go to possess their land; but, for
the wickedness of these nations, the Lord thy God hath driven them out
from before thee, and that He may perform the word which the Lord swore
unto thy fathers--Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.” “Understand, therefore, that
the Lord thy God giveth thee not this good land to possess it for thy
righteousness; for thou art a stiff-necked people.”

They were a stiff-necked people. It was not for the righteousness of the
children of Israel that the Lord gave them this land. He hated these
nations on account of their wickedness.

Now, Joshua has overcome them and driven them from the face of the earth,
and this brings out one noble trait in his character. When he came to
divide up the land, Joshua took the poorest treasure himself, that he
might be near the ark. And there, on Mount Ephraim, he died at the
ripe old age of one hundred and ten years. During all those years not
a man was able to stand before him. See the contrast between his dying
testimony and that of Jacob! Jacob’s self-reproach was: “Few and evil
have the days of the years of my life been.” He had a stormy voyage.

Look and see this old warrior going to rest. He had tried God forty
years. He had heard the crack of the slave driver’s whip, down there in
Egypt. But probably he had a praying mother, who talked to him about this
King of the Hebrews, about the God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob, and
he believed in that God. When Moses came down into Egypt he found this
young man just in the prime of his life. Joshua recognized in Moses that
he was an instrument of the Almighty, and that the King of the Hebrews
had sent him there to deliver His people.

Joshua had tried God forty years in the wilderness, and when eighty
years old he was called into the Promised Land. He had tried God thirty
years in Canaan, and now, at the age of one hundred and ten, the aged
and invincible warrior is going home. But he is not going to die like an
infidel. He knows he is about to die, and he calls for all the tribes of
Israel and their elders. These come up from the tribe of Benjamin, the
tribe of Simeon, the tribe of Zebulon, and so on; and they are gathered
at Shiloh, to be there to hear the old prophet and patriarch.

That man of God speaks, and what does he say? What is his dying
testimony? How we all linger around the couch of our dying friends! How
anxious we are to get their last words!

Well, let us turn back. What are the last words of this man who has tried
God and proved God? These are the words: “I am going the way of all the
earth; and ye know in your hearts and in all your souls that not one
thing hath failed of all the good things which the Lord your God spake
concerning you. All are come to pass unto you, and not one thing hath
failed thereof.”

Not one good thing has failed! God has kept His word. God has made His
word good. “Not one good thing hath failed.” What a dying testimony! How
glorious! In the beautiful sunset light the old warrior sank away, like
he was going to sleep. In the dusk of a beautiful Summer’s evening he
passed away. There is the old man’s dying testimony. He could tell the
people of God. He was the only one left. The rest had gone. Moses had
sunk into his desert grave, and the other leaders of the tribe of Israel
had passed away. But now he was going to die in the Promised Land.

Truly, he was a man of courage, obedience and faith.


LOT.

One reason why I take up this character is because I believe he is
a representative man, and perhaps there is no Bible character that
represents so many men of the present day as Lot of Sodom.

Where you can find one Abraham, one Daniel or one Joshua you can find a
thousand Lots.

Lot started out very well. He got rich, and that was the beginning of his
troubles. He and Abraham, his uncle, went down to Egypt, and they came
out of Egypt with great wealth. The next thing we hear of is strife among
their herdsmen.

But Lot could not get up a quarrel with Abraham. Abraham said to him:
“You are my nephew, and I can not quarrel with you; but take your goods
and go to the right and I will go to the left, or I will go to the right
and you go to the left.” And they separated.

Right here Lot made his mistake. He should have said, in reply to
Abraham: “No, uncle! I don’t want to leave you. The Lord has blessed me
with you, and I do not wish to leave you.” But, if he had been determined
to leave his uncle, he should have asked Abraham to choose for him.
Instead of that, he lifted up his eyes and saw the well watered plains of
Sodom, and that decided him.

No doubt Lot was very ambitious; he probably wanted to become richer.
Perhaps there was a little spirit of rivalry toward his uncle. He wanted
to excel Abraham in worldly goods--to become rich faster. So he saw and
determined upon the well watered plains of Sodom. If he had asked Abraham
he would not have gone there. If he had asked God, Lot would never have
entered Sodom; no man ever goes into Sodom by God’s advice. He determined
for himself, and pitched his tent toward Sodom. I do not know how long
Lot lived upon those well watered plains, but no doubt the men of those
days said of him when he had settled down: “There is a shrewd man; he is
a smart man. Why, I can predict that in a very short time he will be a
wealthier man than his uncle, Abraham. Look at these well watered plains.
Why, he is a great deal better off than is Abraham now.”

Lot is in a position in which he can soon become a rich man. How long he
remained on those plains I do not know, but the next thing we know is
that he got into Sodom. We are told that Sodom was very wicked. Lot lived
near it, and he went into it with his eyes open, for he knew all about
it. The wickedness of Sodom was coming up to God. He was going to destroy
it soon. Do you think, if Lot had asked Him, He would have permitted the
nephew of Abraham to enter that city?

All the years that Lot was in Sodom we do not read that he had any family
altar. He must have known it meant ruin for his family to take them in
there. But he did not look at that. It was business that took him there.
He might have said: “Well, I’ve got a large family. I’ve got a great
many dependent upon me, and I must get rich faster; so I will go into
Sodom. Business is the first consideration, and it must be attended to.”
So he goes into Sodom, and the next thing we hear he is in trouble. Sodom
had got a war on hand, and when he went into the city he was forced to
take its side. In the war he was taken captive. It is a great mercy he
was not killed in battle.

The first thing Abraham did when he heard of his nephew’s trouble was
to set out after him. When Lot was captured in battle he was liable to
be taken into slavery, and his children also. He might have died in
slavery if Abraham had not gone after him. But Abraham takes his servants
and sets out and overtakes the warriors who had taken Lot captive, and
brought him back, with all the property that had been taken.

Now, you would think Lot would have kept out of Sodom. You would expect
to hear of his saying: “I have had enough of Sodom; I will not go near
it again.” You would think that men, when they get into this and that
difficulty and affliction, would keep out of Sodom; but they will not. It
is one of the greatest mysteries to me why men will remain in their Sodom
when they have continual trouble.

So Lot went back. Probably he said: “I’ve lost a great deal, and I must
go back and try to recover it. I must go back and make it up for my
children.” And he prospered in Sodom.

If you had gone into Sodom before these angels came down you would
probably have found that no man had got on so well. If they had a
Congress, perhaps they sent him to represent Sodom, because no man had
done better in business. That is the way of the world. Possibly they
might have made him Mayor of Sodom. If you could have seen his “turnout,”
it would have been one of the very best. Mrs. Lot must have moved in the
most select society of the city. The Misses Lot were looked upon as the
most fashionable people there. They got on well.

Perhaps Lot was a judge and had great influence. When the angels got to
the gate they might have heard of the Honorable Judge Lot. It sounded
pretty well. He might have owned many corner lots. He might have owned
many buildings with “Lot” printed all over them, and on account of his
property he might have been a very high man in Sodom. That is the way the
world looks at it. No doubt the dispositions of those people were exactly
as they are today. Human nature has been pretty much the same always.

But time rolls on, and Lot, while sitting at the gate one evening, saw
two strangers upon the highway. They are coming toward Sodom. Likely
these Sodomites did not know them, but twenty years before Lot had been
in the company of Abraham, and he had seen these men at his uncle’s
house--had seen them sitting at his uncle’s table. So he knew these
angels when they approached, and he bowed down and worshiped them; he
bowed down to the ground, and then invited them into his residence. But
it was a sink of iniquity, and they would not enter in. Lot pressed his
invitation upon them, and finally they accepted.

The news was soon noised around the streets that he had two strangers
there, and it was not long before a crowd was around the door, and wanted
to know whom he had inside.

Lot came out and endeavored to pacify them, but he was met with the
derisive query: “Who made this fellow a judge over us?” He was dragged
back into the house, and the door was shut against the mob. His influence
was gone. He had been in the city twenty years and had not made a convert.

I suppose Lot lived in a marble front house there, and his heart was away
from God. Then these men said to Lot: “Whom have you got here beside
yourself? What is your family? Have you got any others beside yourself in
this town?”

Well, the father and mother had to own up that they had married their
children to some of the Sodomites. That was the result of his going into
the city. You go into the world and live like the world, and see what the
result will be. How many fathers and mothers are now mourning on account
of marrying their sons and daughters to Sodomites! Marrying them to death
and ruin!

These angels said to Lot: “If you have got any, get them out of this
place, for God is determined to burn it up. Tell them this, and if they
will not come, escape for your lives and leave them, for He will surely
destroy the city.”

Now, all these twenty years we do not know that Lot ever had a family
altar. He could not call his children around him and pray to his God.
They had all become identified with Sodom and its people.

Look at that scene. There are the men at the outside of the door,
groping about to find it, and the door opens and Lot starts out to tell
his son-in-law of the coming destruction. I can see the old man, head
bowed down, passing through the streets of Sodom at midnight.

He goes to a house and knocks. No sound; all are asleep. He knocks again,
and likely shouts at the top of his voice; and the man gets up and opens
the window. He puts his head out and asks:

“Who’s there?”

“Lot, your father-in-law.”

“What has brought you out of bed at this hour? What’s up?”

“Why, two angels are at my house, who say that God is going to destroy
Sodom and every one who shall remain here.”

“You go home and get to bed.”

They mock Lot. He has lost his testimony. They all think he is deluded.

I can see him now, going off to another daughter’s house. I know not how
many daughters Lot had. He might have had as many daughters as Job. He
goes to them, and they mock him, too.

There is that old man, in that midnight hour, plodding along those
streets of Sodom to urge them to flee from the city, and they mock him.
He had been long enough with Abraham to know that every thing that came
from God could be relied upon.

Now he starts back home. You can see him--his head bowed down, his long
white hair flowing over his bosom and tears flowing from those aged eyes!
The world calls him a successful man; but what a miserable end is his!
Look at him tonight! He had achieved his ambition, and was wealthy. He
obtained what he longed for, but with it came leanness of soul.

Next morning the angels take him by the hand. He and his wife and two
daughters are led out of the city. And they lingered. How could they do
otherwise than linger, when they had left their sons and daughters in the
city and knew they would be destroyed?

Yes, they linger. I do not blame them. They had, probably, a faint hope
that the threatened storm might be stayed, and they could get their
children out. But the angels took them by the hand and hastened them out
of the city.

Poor mother! Ah, how sad when God came in judgment! I can see that mother
hesitating, but God orders her not to look back. “Flee for your life;
escape or you will be destroyed.” “No man having put his hand to the
plow, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God.”

Mrs. Lot gets out of Sodom, but she looks back, and judgment falls upon
her. And I believe that the condition of Lot’s wife is the condition of
millions today. They have come out of Sodom, but their hearts are in the
world. They ask: “Have I to give up the world? Have I to give up all and
follow Christ?” They linger and look back, and judgment will fall upon
them.

We are told in the Scriptures that the people were eating, drinking,
buying and selling, planning and building until the very moment Lot went
out of Sodom. Perhaps not a man in all Sodom took any account of his
going out. It might have got rumored around that he was going because he
believed the city was about to be destroyed, but no man believed it. His
sons and daughters did not believe what their father said to them, and
the Son of God says they were all destroyed--great and small, learned and
unlearned, rich and poor. All alike perished.

Bear in mind that if you live in Sodom destruction will come upon you.
The world may call you successful, but the only way to test success is to
take a man’s whole life--not the beginning nor middle, but the whole of
it. If a man is in Sodom, he will find at last the fruits of his life to
be

    “Nothing but leaves--nothing but leaves.”

Lot spent his life in gaining worldly goods for his children, and he lost
all and his children besides.

How many men of the present day can only say they have the same object in
view that Lot had. They went into the city to make money. They have built
no family altar. They recognize only two things--money and business.
They say: “My sons may become gamblers and drunkards and my daughters
may go off into ungodly society and marry drunkards and make their lives
miserable; but I want money, and I will have all I wish if I get it.”

My friends, was Lot’s life a successful one? It was a stupendous failure.
Let us not follow in the footsteps of this man Lot. Let us keep out of
Sodom.


MARTHA.

There was a woman right in the midst of this darkness, when many
disciples left Him, who came forward and invited Him to her home--a woman
by the name of Martha.

I can imagine Martha coming from Bethany, one day, and going into the
Temple, in Jerusalem, to worship. The great Galilean Prophet came in, Who
spake as never man spake, and she listened to His words. And as the words
came from His lips they fell upon Martha’s ears, and she says: “Well, I
will invite Him to my house.”

It must have cost her something to do that. Christ was unpopular.
There was a hiss going up in Jerusalem against Him. They called Him an
impostor. All the leading men of the nation were opposed to Him. They
said He was Beelzebub, the Lord of filth. They charged that He was an
impostor and a deceiver. And yet Martha invites Him to her home. I hope
there will always be some Martha to invite Him to her home, to be her
guest. He will make that home a thousand times better than it ever was
before.

Martha invited Him home with her. We read of His going often to Bethany.
The noblest, best and grandest thing Martha ever did was to make room in
her home for Jesus Christ. That one act will live for ever. Little did
she know, when she invited the Son of God to become her guest, who He
was; and when we receive Jesus into our hearts little do we know who He
is. It will take all eternity to find out who He is.

There was a dark cloud then over that home in Bethany, but Martha did
not know it. Neither did Mary see that cloud. It was fast settling down
upon that home. It was soon going to burst upon that little family. The
Savior knew all about it. He saw that dark cloud coming across that
threshold.

We read that Jesus often lodged there. But a few months after He became
their friend and guest, Lazarus sickened. The fever laid hold of him. It
might have been typhoid fever.

You can see those two sisters watching over their brother. The family
physician is sent for to Jerusalem, and he comes out and does every
thing he can to restore Lazarus to health; but he sinks lower and lower.
Some of us know what it is when the doctor comes in and feels the pulse,
begins to look very serious and takes you into another room, away from
the patient, and tells you it is a critical case.

Martha and Mary passed through that experience. There was no hope, and
Lazarus must die. They felt that if Jesus was only here He would rebuke
this disease. He might prevent death from taking away our only brother.
They sent a messenger a good ways off to tell Jesus His friend was sick,
and this was the message:

“He whom Thou lovest is sick.”

They do not ask Him to come. They knew Jesus loved Lazarus, and that He
would come if it was for their good. The messenger at last returned.
He found Christ and delivered his message. When he got back, he found
that the cloud had burst upon that little home, and Lazarus was dead and
buried.

I see those two sisters as they gather around the messenger, eagerly
plying him with questions. They asked: “Did you find Him?”

“Yes, I found Him.”

“What did He say?”

“He said the sickness was not unto death, and He would come and see him.”

Now, for the first time, I see faith beginning to stagger. Mary asks the
messenger:

“Are you sure you understood Him? Did He say the sickness was not unto
death?”

“Yes.”

“Are you quite sure?”

“Yes.”

“Well, that is strange. If He is a prophet He should have known that
Lazarus was dead. Sure Elijah would have known it. If He was a prophet,
He must have known it. You had not been away from the house an hour
before Lazarus died. He was dead when you met Him.”

“Well, that is what He told me. He said He would come here and see him.”

I see those two sisters as they kept watching for that Friend to come and
comfort them. How long those nights must have seemed, as they watched and
waited! I can imagine they did not sleep through the night, but listened
to hear a footfall. The next day they watched, and He did not come. The
second night passed, and He did not come. The third day came, and He
did not come. The fourth day comes, and the messenger returns and says:
“Martha, Jesus and His apostles are just outside the walls of the city.
He is coming on toward Bethany.” Martha runs out to meet Him, and says:
“If Thou hadst been here my brother had not died. Thou wouldst have kept
death away from our dwelling.”

Jesus answered her: “But thy brother shall rise again.”

“Yes, I knew that,” says Martha. “I know Lazarus will rise again, for he
was such a good brother. He will rise at the resurrection of the just.”

Jesus had probably taught them of the resurrection. He answered Martha:
“I am the resurrection of the just. I carry the keys with Me. I have the
keys to death and the grave.” Then He asks: “Where is Mary? Go call her.”

They ran and told Mary that Jesus was there. Mary met Jesus with the
words of Martha:

“If Thou hadst been here my brother had not died.”

“Thy brother shall rise again. Where have you laid him?”

“Come and see.”

And they led the way. Look at that company moving along toward the grave
yard. These two sisters are telling about the last words and last acts
of Lazarus. Perhaps Lazarus left a loving message for Jesus. You know
what that is. When you go to see friends who are mourning, how they will
dwell upon the last words and the last acts of the departed ones! You see
Martha and Mary weeping as they went along toward the grave, and the Son
of God wept with them.

Jesus said to His disciples: “Take away the stone.”

Again the faith of those sisters wavered, and they said: “Lord, by this
time he stinketh, for he has been dead four days.” They did not know who
their Friend was. When the disciples rolled away that stone Christ cried
in a loud voice to His old friend:

“Lazarus, come forth.”

Then Lazarus leaped out of that same sepulcher and came forth. Some old
divine has said it was a good thing that Jesus singled out Lazarus, for
there is such power in the voice of the Son of God that the dead shall
hear His voice, and if He had not called for Lazarus by name all the dead
in that grave yard would have come forth.

Little did Martha know whom she was entertaining when she invited Christ
into her home. The world has been sneering at Martha ever since. But it
was by far the grandest, sublimest and noblest act of her life.


MEPHIBOSHETH.

There is a story in the Books of Samuel--away back as far as the time of
the kings of Israel--which will help us to understand the Gospel. It is
about a man of the name of Mephibosheth.

You remember what a hard time David had when Saul was hunting him to kill
him--just as men hunt for game.

Well, one day David and his good friend, Jonathan, were taking a walk
together in the fields. Saul was very angry, and was bent on killing
David; but his son, Jonathan, was looking out for a chance to save him.

The fact had been revealed to Jonathan that David was to be king after
Saul’s death, instead of himself, but this did not lessen his love for
David. That must have been a real friendship which could stand this sort
of thing.

After they had agreed upon a sign by which David was to know whether it
was safe for him to stay around the court of the king, where he could see
his friend once in a while, or whether he must leave, and go off into the
cave of Adullam, Jonathan says to him:

“David, it has been revealed to me that you are to be king after my
father. Now, I want you to promise me one thing. When you come to the
throne, if any of the house of Saul are alive, I want you to be good to
them, for my sake.”

“I will do that, of course,” said David. So he made a solemn covenant to
that effect, and then he went away to the cave of Adullam, to get out of
the way of Saul, who was bound to kill him if he could.

But God took care of David. You never can kill or harm a man if God is
taking care of him.

About four years after that, David heard that there had been a great
battle over by Mount Gilboa, and that the Philistines had beaten back the
Israelites with great slaughter, and that Saul and Jonathan were both
dead. So he got his men together, and went out after the enemies of the
Lord and of Israel; and it was not a great while before he had turned the
tables on them, and set up his kingdom at Hebron.

It must have been pretty near fourteen years after that before David
remembered his promise to his old friend, Jonathan. It is a great deal
easier to make promises than to keep them. How many broken vows has God
written down against you?

But one day King David was walking in his palace at Jerusalem, where he
had removed his capital, and all at once he happened to think of that
promise. It is a good thing God does not forget His promises that way.

“That’s too bad,” mused David. “I had forgot all about that promise. I
have been so busy fighting these Philistines and fixing things up that I
have not had time to think of any thing else.”

So he called his servants in great haste, and asked: “Do any of you know
whether there is any of Saul’s family living?”

One of them said there was an old servant of Saul’s by the name of Ziba,
and maybe he could tell.

“Go and tell him I want him, right away.”

Pretty soon Ziba appeared, and King David asked: “Do you know whether
there is anybody of the house of Saul in my kingdom?”

Ziba said there was one he knew of--a son of Jonathan, by the name of
Mephibosheth.

Jonathan! How that name must have smitten King David! One of the sons of
his old friend living in his kingdom for as much as fourteen years, and
he had never known it! What would Jonathan think of him for forgetting
his promise that way?

“Go, fetch him!” says David. “Go quickly. Tell him I want him. I want to
show him the kindness of God.”

Now, where do you suppose Mephibosheth was all this time? Why, he was
down at Lo-debar. Did you ever hear of that place? If you are a sailor,
did you ever come across that port? When you have traveled on the
railway, did any of you ever stop at that station?

Ah, yes! That is where the whole human race are until they come to Christ
for salvation--away down at Lo-debar, which means “a place of no pasture.”

The king is in haste to keep his promise now. I see them hurrying off.
Maybe they take the king’s own chariot, and rattle away to find this son
of Jonathan.

When they reached the little out-of-the-way place, I fancy there was a
great commotion.

“Where is Mephibosheth? The king wants him.”

Poor fellow! When he heard this announcement he hung his head. He was
afraid the king wanted to kill him because he was of the house of Saul,
his old enemy.

“Don’t be afraid,” said the servants. “The king says he wants to show
you the kindness of God. He is in a great hurry to see you, so get ready
and jump right into the chariot. Don’t you see the king has sent his own
chariot to fetch you?”

It did begin to look as if the king meant no harm to him.

But poor Mephibosheth had another difficulty. He was lame in both feet.
He was a little fellow when King David came to the throne, and an old
servant, who was afraid that all the house of Saul would be killed, took
him up and ran away to hide him. Somehow he managed to drop the lad, and
lamed him in both feet.

And now I can see poor Mephibosheth looking down at his feet. Maybe his
toes turned in, or he was club-footed. And he says to himself: “I am not
fit to go to the king. I am a poor cripple. I am not fit to be seen among
the tall and handsome servants of the palace in Jerusalem.”

“Never mind your lame feet, Mephibosheth; so long as the king sends for
you, it is all right.”

So they take him up and put him in the chariot, and start for Jerusalem
on a run.

As soon as the king sees him he takes him in his arms and cries out:

“O Mephibosheth! The son of my dear old friend, Jonathan! You shall have
all that ever belonged to the house of Saul, and you shall live with me
here, in the palace.”

Some people think that Mephibosheth, like certain low-spirited
Christians, after he went to live with the king, must have been all the
time worrying over his lame feet. But I do not think so. He could not
help it, and if David did not mind it, it was all right. So, I think that
when he dined with David in state, with the great lords and ladies all
around him, he just stuck his club feet under the table, and looked the
king right in the face.


MOSES.

Moses was about to leave the children of Israel in the wilderness. He had
led them up to the borders of the Promised Land. For forty long years he
had been leading them in that wilderness, and now, as they are about to
go over, Moses takes his farewell. He said a great many wise and good
things on that memorable occasion.

There was not a man on the face of the earth at that time who knew as
much about the world and as much about God as did Moses. Therefore, he
was a good judge. He had tasted of the pleasures of the world. In the
forty years that he was in Egypt he probably sampled every thing of that
day. He tasted of the world--of its pleasures. He knew all about it. He
was brought up in the palace of a king, a prince. Egypt then ruled the
world, as it were.

Moses had been forty years in Horeb, where he had heard the voice of
God--where he had been taught by God--and for forty years he had been
serving God. You might say he was God’s right hand man, leading those
bondmen up out of the land of Egypt and out of the house of bondage into
the land of liberty, and this is his dying address--you might say, his
farewell address. This is the dying testimony of one who could speak with
authority and one who could speak intelligently.

If you have not read that farewell address of Moses, you will find it
in the last few verses of Deuteronomy. I advise you to read it. You are
reading a great many printed sermons. Suppose you read that. Why, there
is as much truth in that farewell address of Moses as there is in fifteen
hundred printed sermons at the present time. Let me just give you a few
verses:

    “Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O Earth,
    the words of my mouth.

    “My doctrine shall drop as the rain; my speech shall distill
    as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the
    showers upon the grass.

    “Because I will publish the name of the Lord. Ascribe ye
    greatness unto our God.

    “He is the Rock; His work is perfect. For all His ways are
    judgment; a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right
    is He.

    “They have corrupted themselves; their spot is not the spot of
    His children. They are a perverse and crooked generation.

    “Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Is
    not He thy Father that hath bought thee? Hath He not made thee
    and established thee?

    “Remember the days of old; consider the years of many
    generations. Ask thy Father, and He will show thee; thy elders,
    and they will tell thee.

    “When the Most High divided to the nations their inheritance,
    when He separated the sons of Adam, He set the bounds of the
    people according to the number of the children of Israel.

    “For the Lord’s portion is His people; Jacob is the lot of His
    inheritance.

    “He found him in a desert land, and in the waste howling
    wilderness. He led him about; He instructed him; He kept him as
    the apple of His eye.”

There are two or three sermons in that last verse.

    “As an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young,
    spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her
    wings, so the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange
    god with him.

    “He made him ride on the high places of the Earth, that he
    might eat the increase of the fields; and He made him to suck
    honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock.”

And so Moses went on and finished his sermon, and God called him off into
the mountain. He went up into Mount Nebo, and there God showed him, from
the top of Pisgah, that land which he could not possess; showed him the
land from Dan to Beersheba.

Then “God kissed away his soul and buried him.”


NAAMAN.

Naaman was a successful, valiant and noble man. But he was a leper--and
that spoiled him.

What a blight that must have cast on his path! It must have haunted him
day and night.

He was a leper, and there was no physician in Syria who could help him.
It was an incurable disease, and I suppose he thought he would have to go
down to the grave with that loathsome ailment.

We read that several companies had gone down to the land of Israel and
brought back to Syria some poor captives. Among them was a little girl,
who was sent to wait on Naaman’s wife. I can imagine that little maid had
a praying mother, who had taught her to love the Lord, and when she got
down there she was not ashamed to own her religion. She was not ashamed
to acknowledge her Lord.

One day, while waiting on her mistress, I can think of her saying: “Would
to God your husband was in Samaria. There is a prophet in that country
who would cure him.”

“What! A man in Israel who can cure my husband? Child, you must be
dreaming. Did you ever hear of a man being cured of leprosy?”

“No. But that is nothing. Why, the prophet in Samaria has cured many
persons worse than your husband.”

And perhaps she told her about the poor woman who had such an increase
of oil, and how her two boys were saved from slavery by the prophet,
and also how he had raised the child of that poor woman from the dead,
adding: “If the prophet can raise anybody from the dead he can cure your
husband.”

This girl must have had something about her to make those people listen
to her. She must have shown her religion in her life. Her life must have
been consistent with her religion to make them believe her.

We read that Naaman had faith in her word, and he went to the king and
told him what he intended to do. And the king said: “I will tell you what
I will do. I will give you a letter to the king of Israel. Of course, if
any cure is to be effected, the king will know how to obtain it.”

Like many men nowadays, they believed, if a thing was to be got, it was
to be got from the king, and not from his subjects. So you see this man
starting out to the king of Israel with all his letters and a very long
purse. I can not find, just now, how much it was, but it must have been
something like $500,000. The sum was a very large one, likely. He was
going to be liberal. He was not going to be small.

Well, he got all his money and letters together and started. There was no
small stir as Naaman swept through the gates of Syria that day with his
escort. He reaches Samaria, and sends a messenger to the king, announcing
his arrival. The messenger delivers the letter to the king, and the first
thing he does is to open the letter and begin to read it.

I can see his brow knit as he goes on.

“What is this? What does it mean? This man means war. This Assyrian king
means to have a war with me. Who ever heard of such a thing as a man
cured of leprosy?”

And the king rent his mantle.

Every one knew something was wrong when the king rent his mantle, and the
news spread through the streets that they were on the eve of a war. The
air was filled with rumors of war; everybody was talking about it. No
doubt the news had gone abroad that the great general of Assyria was in
the city, and he was the cause of the rumors, and by-and-by it reached
the prophet Elisha that the king had rent his mantle, and he wanted to
know the cause. When he had heard what it was he just told the king to
send Naaman to him.

Now you see the major-general riding up in grand style to the prophet’s
house. He probably lived in a small and obscure dwelling. Perhaps Naaman
thought he was doing Elisha a great favor by calling on him. He had an
idea that he was honoring this man, who had no influence or position.
So he rides up. A messenger is sent in to announce Major-General Naaman
of Damascus. But the prophet does not even see him. He just tells the
servant to say to his master:

“Go and wash in Jordan seven times.”

When the messenger comes to Naaman and tells him this, he is as mad as
any thing. He considers it a reflection upon him--as if he had not kept
his person clean.

“Does the man mean to insinuate that I have not kept my body clean? Can’t
I wash myself in the waters of Damascus? We have much better water than
they have here. Why, if we had the Jordan in Syria we certainly would
look upon it as a ditch. The idea--wash in that contemptible river!”

Naaman was as full of rage as he well could be, but suddenly he said:
“Behold, I thought.”

That is the way with sinners; they always say they thought. In this
expression we can see that Naaman had thought of some plan, and had
marked out a way for the Lord to heal him.

Keep this in mind: “My ways are not your ways, nor my thoughts your
thoughts.” If you look for the Lord to come in one direction, He
will come in another direction. “My ways are not your ways,” thought
the leper. No man gets into the kingdom of God until he gives up his
thoughts. God never saves a man until he gives up his own thoughts and
takes up God’s.

Yes, Naaman thought the moment the prophet knew he was outside he would
come out and bow and scrape, and say he was glad to see such a great
and honorable man from Syria. Instead of that, he merely sent him the
peremptory prescription: “Go wash in Jordan seven times.”

When we were in Glasgow we had an employer converted, and he wanted to
get a man in his employ to come to our meetings, but he would not come.
If he was going to be converted, he would not be converted by those
meetings. You know, when a Scotchman gets an idea into his head he is the
most stubborn man you can find. He was determined not to be converted by
Moody and Sankey. The employer argued and pleaded with this man, but he
could not get him to come to the meetings then being held.

Well, we left Glasgow, and got away up to the north of Scotland--in
Inverness--and the employer sent his stubborn friend up there on
business, thinking he might be induced to go into the meetings. One night
we were singing “On the Banks of That Beautiful River,” and he happened
to be passing. He wondered where the sweet sounds were coming from. He
came into the meeting, and I happened to be preaching that evening on the
very text: “I Thought.”

The stubborn man from Glasgow listened attentively, and soon did not know
exactly where he was. He was convicted--he was converted--and he became a
Christian. Verily, a man must yield his own way to the way of the Lord.

Now, you can see all along that Naaman’s thoughts were altogether
different from those of God. He was going to get the grace of God by
showing favors--just as many men now believe they can buy their way into
the kingdom of God. But we can not purchase the favor of Heaven with
money. If you get a seat in Heaven, you must accept salvation as a gift.

Naaman had another thought. He believed he could get what he wanted by
taking letters to the king--not to the prophet. The little maid told him
of the prophet, yet he was going to pass the prophet by. He was too proud
to go to the prophet. But pride, if you will allow me the expression, got
a knock on the head on this important occasion.

It was a terrible thing for him to think of obeying by going down to the
Jordan and dipping seven times. He had got better rivers in Damascus,
in his own wisdom, and he queries: “Can’t I wash there, and be clean?”
Naaman was angry, but when he got over it he listened to his servants.

I would rather see people get angry than see them go to sleep. I would
rather see a man get as angry as possible at any utterance of mine than
to see I had sent him to sleep. When a man is asleep there is no chance
of reaching him, but if he is angry we may get at him. It is a good thing
for a man to get angry sometimes, for when he cools off he generally
listens to reason.

So Naaman’s servant came to him and said: “Suppose Elisha had bid thee do
some great thing, wouldst thou not have done it?”

Probably, had Elisha told Naaman to take cod liver oil for ten years, he
would have willingly done it. If he had told Naaman he wanted as much
money as the leper brought along, that would have been all right. But the
idea of literally doing nothing--just to go down into Jordan and wash
himself! It was so far below his calculations that he thought he was
being imposed upon by some charlatan.

But Naaman’s sensible servant said to him: “If the prophet had bid thee
do some great thing, wouldst thou not have done it? Hadn’t you just
better go down and wash in Jordan?”

Possibly, Naaman answered: “If I go down into Jordan and am not cured,
what will my enemies say of me when I get back to Damascus?”

But he was influenced by the servant, and he went. That was one good
point in Naaman’s character--he was influenced by an humble messenger.
A good many people will not accept a messenger unless he is refined and
cultured and educated. But it is the message you want--not the messenger.
It would be the message I would want. And so it was with Naaman.

She was a little Hebrew girl who first told him to go to Samaria, and now
he was told to wash by his servant. So Naaman goes down and dips into the
waters. The first time he rose he said: “I would just like to see how
much my leprosy has gone.” He looks, but not a bit has left him. “Well, I
am not going to get rid of my leprosy in this way; this is absurd.”

But the servant persisted. “Do just as the man of God tells you; obey
him.”

And this is just what we are told to do in the Scriptures--to obey Him.
The first thing we have to learn is obedience. Disobedience was the pit
Adam fell into, and we must get out of it by obedience.

Well, Naaman goes into the water a second time. If some Chicago
Christians had been there, they would certainly have asked, sneeringly:
“Well, how do you feel now?”

He did not see that he was any better, and down he went a third time; but
when he looked himself over, he saw just as much leprosy as ever. Down he
goes a fourth, fifth and sixth time. He again looks at himself, but not a
speck of leprosy is removed.

Naaman now chides his servant. “I told you so! Look at me! I am just the
same as ever.”

“But,” says the servant, “you must do just what the man of God tells you
to do--go down seven times.”

Naaman takes the seventh plunge, and comes out. He looks at himself.
Behold, his flesh is as that of a little child. He says to his servant:

“Why, I never felt as good as I do today. I feel better than if I had won
a great battle. Look! I am cleansed! Oh, what a great day this is for me!
The leprosy has gone.”

The waters to him had been as death and judgment, and he had come out
resurrected--his flesh as that of a little child. I suppose Naaman got
into his chariot, and away he went to the man of God. He had lost his
temper; he had lost his pride; he had lost his leprosy.

That is the way now. If a man will only lose his pride, he will soon see
his leprosy disappear; leprosy will go away with pride. I believe the
greatest enemies of men in this world are unbelief and pride.

Naaman drives back to the man of God, and takes his gold and silver.
He offers him money. “I do not want your money,” replies the prophet.
If Elisha had taken money, it would have spoiled the beautiful story.
Naaman had to take back every thing he brought from Damascus except his
leprosy.


PETER.

The first glimpse that we catch of Peter is when Andrew brought him to
the Savior. That is John’s account. That is when he became a disciple;
but he did not leave every thing then and follow Christ. He waited until
he got another call.

I think we all can learn a lesson right here--that it is not every one
who is called to be a disciple of Jesus that is called to leave his
occupation and become His follower entirely. I believe there are many
self-made preachers--man-made preachers--and this is the reason why so
many fail. No man who was called by God has ever failed, or has ever
broken down in the ministry; but when a man runs before he is sent, I
believe he will fail.

Now, we are called to be His disciples--all called to follow Him--but
we are not all called on to give up our occupations and devote all our
time to the ministry. I have men come to me constantly who say they have
been raised up, and want to give up their business and their worldly
occupation and go into the work of the Lord entirely; but I never advise
a man to go into the ministry. I think I never advised a man to give up
his occupation, and to go out into the vineyard of the Lord and go to
work. It is too high a calling, it seems to me, for men to be influencing
one another to go into it. If a man will only wait until God calls
him--be sure that God sends him--then success will crown his efforts.

Now, we find, in the fifth chapter of Luke, and also in the fourth
chapter of Matthew, where Peter got his calling. He was out with his
partners and others, fishing, when Jesus came along and told them to cast
their net, or to launch out into the deep and cast their net into the sea.

“But,” says Peter, “we have toiled all night and caught nothing.”

“Nevertheless,” commanded Jesus, “let down your nets.”

At the word of God they did so, and were successful, and when they got
ashore they found Jesus had called them to be His disciples. Just open
your Bible at the fifth chapter of Luke:

“And it came to pass that, as the people pressed upon Him to hear the
word of God, He stood by the lake of Gennesaret, and saw two ships
standing by the lake; but the fishermen were gone out of them, and were
washing their nets.

“And He entered into one of the ships, which was Simon’s, and prayed him
that he would thrust out a little from the land. And He sat down, and
taught the people out of the ship.

“Now, when He had left speaking, He said unto Simon: ‘Launch out into the
deep, and let down your nets for a draught.’

“And Simon, answering, said unto Him: ‘Master, we have toiled all the
night, and have taken nothing; nevertheless, at Thy word I will let down
the net.’

“And when they had done this, they inclosed a great multitude of fishes,
and their net broke.

“And they beckoned unto their partners, which were in the other ship,
that they should come and help them. And they came, and filled both the
ships, so that they began to sink.

“When Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus’ knees, saying: ‘Depart
from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord.’

“For he was astonished, and all that were with him, at the draught of the
fishes which they had taken.

“And so, also, were James and John, the sons of Zebedee, which were
partners with Simon. And Jesus said unto Simon: ‘Fear not. Henceforth
thou shalt catch men.’

“And when they had brought their ships to land, they forsook all, and
followed Him.”

You see, it says Christ just said to them: “Follow me, and I will make
you fishers of men.” And no one was more successful in the world, in
catching men, than Peter. And if you will just follow the Lord and
believe in Him, He will make you fishers of men. Now, some may wonder why
it was that God did not call them when they had their nets empty. Why did
the Lord just give them a draught of fish and then tell them to leave it?

Now, it seems to me that He did so because He wanted them to leave
something. There are a good many of us willing to be disciples of the
Lord if it does not cost any thing. If they can just swing their bag
across their back with the fish in it and follow Jesus, then they are
willing to follow Him, and to be His disciples. So Jesus wanted them to
give up something. They might have said:

“We have been fishing a great while in the lake, business is pretty poor,
and we might as well give up the business and go into this.”

But no! The Lord did not call them until after they attained success.
Now, after they scored a business success, He put the test to these men
whether they were willing to give up their nets and follow Him.

Sometime after that, Peter says: “We have left every thing to follow
Thee.” What did Peter leave? Why, a few old broken nets! And it is just
so now. People leave a few old broken nets, and then say to the Lord: “We
have left every thing to follow Thee.”

The next glimpse we catch of Peter is when he takes on the character
of a doubter. You will find, if you read it over, that it is our own
experience right over again. Peter got to doubting.

In the fourteenth chapter of Matthew, beginning at the twenty-second
verse, you will find these words:

“And straightway Jesus constrained His disciples to get into a ship, and
to go before Him unto the other side, while He sent the multitudes away.

“And when He had sent the multitudes away, He went up into a mountain
apart to pray; and when the evening was come He was there alone.

“But the ship was now in the midst of the sea, tossed with waves; for the
wind was contrary.

“And in the fourth watch of the night Jesus went unto them, walking on
the sea.

“And when the disciples saw Him walking on the sea, they were troubled,
saying: ‘It is a spirit.’ And they cried out for fear.

“But straightway Jesus spake unto them, saying: ‘Be of good cheer; it is
I; be not afraid.’

“And Peter answered Him and said: ‘Lord, if it be Thou, bid me come unto
Thee on the water.’

“And He said: ‘Come.’ And when Peter was come down out of the ship, he
walked on the water to go to Jesus.”

Now, that took faith. The idea of his just letting go the boat, and
stepping down into the water! Why, that required faith. And there are a
great many men today willing to become Christians if they can only just
see how they are going to walk. They want to walk by sight. They do not
want to walk by faith. It took faith for Peter to let go of the boat and
take the first step on the water, but the Lord had bid him to do it, and
he just did it; but after he began to sink he began to doubt, and called
on the Lord to save him.

“But when he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid; and beginning to
sink, he cried, saying: ‘Lord, save me.’”

See! He began to sink when he took his eyes off his Master. Peter did not
trust in Him. He did not have perfect faith.

Now, the Lord says in Isaiah, twenty-sixth chapter and third verse:

“Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on Thee,
because he trusteth in Thee.”

Peter did not have perfect faith, because his mind was not stayed on
Christ; he did not trust in Him. If Peter had trusted in the Lord he
would not have sunk. The ship was in the midst of the sea; the wind was
blowing quite a gale, and the waves were rolling high, and Peter began to
tremble and doubt, and down he went. And a good many Christians follow
his example. When it gets dark, when the wind begins to blow, and when
the water rolls high about them, they begin to doubt--and down they go.

Some one says if Peter had as long a preamble to his prayer as most
people, he would have been forty feet under water before he got through
praying for what he wanted. Now, just read a little farther:

“And immediately Jesus stretched forth His hand, and caught him, and said
unto him: ‘O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?’”

But I want to pass rapidly over this portion of the Word of God, and get
at something which, perhaps, may be of more help to us than any thing
here. In the sixteenth chapter of Matthew, twenty-fourth verse, we find
that Peter was willing to confess Christ as the Son of the living God.
Many men want to be disciples of Christ, but they are not willing to
confess Him.

“Then said Jesus unto His disciples: ‘If any man will come after Me, let
him deny himself and take up his cross and follow Me.”

To go home and tell your friends that you want to be a disciple of the
Lord Jesus Christ requires much moral courage. But it required more then
than it does now, for the Jews said any man who should confess Christ
should be cast out of the synagogue.

“When Jesus came into the coasts of Cæsarea Philippi, He asked His
disciples, saying: ‘Whom do men say that I, the Son of man, am?’

“And they said: ‘Some say that Thou art John the Baptist; some, Elias;
and others, Jeremias or one of the prophets.’

“He saith unto them: ‘But whom say ye that I am?’”

And Peter--he generally spoke first--speaks out and says:

“‘Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.’

“And Jesus answered and said unto him: ‘Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona;
for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which
is in Heaven.’”

See! Jesus blessed Peter right there, and I have yet to find the first
man and the first woman who are willing to confess Christ who will not
say that God has blessed their souls after they have confessed Him.

Now, let me call your attention to another scene in the life of Peter.
He got to be a sort of a--well, I may say a sort of “high church” man.
He belonged to the “high church.” He was a sort of Ritualist. He had got
this idea that Christ was the same as any other saint; that He was to be
put on a level with some of the rest of the saints. He did not make any
distinction.

In the ninth chapter of Luke we find that Jesus took His disciples and
went up into a mountain to pray. We begin at the twenty-eighth verse:

“And it came to pass about eight days after these sayings, He took Peter
and John and James, and went up into a mountain to pray.

“And as He prayed, the fashion of His countenance was altered, and His
raiment was white and glistering.

“And, behold, there talked with Him two men, which were Moses and Elias.

“Who appeared in glory, and spake of His decease which He should
accomplish at Jerusalem.

“But Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep; and when
they were awake, they saw His glory, and the two men that stood with Him.

“And it came to pass, as they departed from Him, Peter said unto
Jesus: ‘Master, it is good for us to be here; and let us make three
tabernacles--one for Thee and one for Moses and one for Elias’--not
knowing what he said.”

Peter wanted to put Jesus on a level with Moses and Elias. To be sure,
Moses was a mighty man. He went into the mountain and took the law from
the Lord God of Heaven, and Elias was a representative of the prophets
and a mighty man; but when Peter wanted to put them on a level with the
God-man--with Jesus--what took place? Why, there came a cloud which
over-shadowed them. God caught them right away. God would not have them
placing Moses and Elias on a level with His Son. He is above the angels
of Heaven; and we find over here, in the last chapter of the Bible,
and in almost the last verse in it, that John was guilty of the same
thing--of worshiping angels. It says over here, in the twenty-second
chapter and eighth verse of Revelations:

“And I, John, saw these things and heard them. And when I had heard and
seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel which showed
me these things.

“Then saith he unto me: ‘See thou do it not; for I am thy fellow servant,
and of thy brethren the prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of
this book. Worship God.’”

Now, if Jesus was not the God-man--if He was not God in the flesh--then
you and I are guilty of idolatry; we are breaking the first command:
“Thou shalt have no other God before Me.”

But when Jesus came down here, He said: “Come unto Me, all ye that are
weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” And He never rebuked
any one for worshiping Him. But John fell down and worshiped that angel,
and the angel refused to let him; and when Peter wanted to put Elias and
Moses on a level with Christ, God the Father spoke and said: “This is my
beloved Son. Hear ye Him.”

No matter about Elias now. No matter about Moses now. Hear Jesus. He is
the one that God wants all of us here to worship.

Now, some one says we can not know, down here, whether we are safe or
not. Well, we have an assurance right here:

“Then Simon Peter answered Him: ‘Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast the
words of eternal life.

“‘And we believe and are sure that Thou art that Christ, the Son of the
living God.’”

I will now call your attention to Peters faults. If you will just turn
over here into the twenty-second chapter of Luke, you will find there a
fault. Begin at the thirty-third verse of the twenty-second chapter of
Luke, and you will find the following:

“And he said unto him: ‘Lord, I am ready to go with Thee, both into
prison and to death.’

“And He said: ‘I tell thee, Peter, the cock shall not crow, this day,
before that thou shalt thrice deny that thou knowest Me.’

“And He said unto them: ‘When I sent you without purse and scrip and
shoes, lacked ye any thing?’ And they said: ‘Nothing.’”

Now, here we find Peter’s fault of self-confidence. That was really his
besetting sin, and when the Lord told him that the cock should not crow
twice before he had denied Him thrice, he ought to have believed the
words of Christ and cried for help; but no, he was very self-confident.
“Why,” says he, “if the rest of the disciples deny You, I will not deny
You.”

Peter not only declared he would not deny Jesus, but he even tried to
make the other disciples worse by comparison. If you meet a man full of
conceit and self-confidence, you may look for that man’s downfall.

Men who have stood the highest, in Scripture, have often fallen on their
strongest point.

Moses was noted for his humility. Right there he fell. He got angry
instead of being humble, and fell through lack of humility.

Elijah was noted for his boldness. Right there he fell. Why, he stood on
Mount Carmel and defied the whole nation. He stood there alone. He seemed
to be the boldest man in the whole nation. But after a while he got
word that Jezebel was going to take his life, and then he lost all his
boldness and got scared at the threat of a woman.

There was Samson, who was noted for his strength. He lost his hair,
wherein his strength consisted, but he recovered it. They cut off his
hair, but they did not remove the roots, and it grew out again.

Abraham was noted for his faith. But he got into Egypt, and denied his
wife.

There was only one time, I am told, that Edinburgh Castle was ever taken
by the enemy, and that was done by climbing on the back rocks. The rocks
were so steep the besieged did not believe the enemy could get in that
way, but that was just where they got in.

I used to think when I had been a Christian ten or twelve years I should
be so strong that there would be no danger of my ever being tempted, but
I find that I was blind. I have more temptations now than I ever had
before, and it takes twenty times as much grace to keep me now as at
first. Let every man take heed, lest he fall. We can not tell how quickly
we may fall if we are not kept by the grace of God.

Peter had to learn this lesson before he went out to preach to others.
He was kept by the grace of God, if he could not keep himself. Well, I
have got right here two faults of the apostle. When the Lord told him he
should deny Him thrice, he ought to have trembled and cried: “Lord, keep
me from denying Thee!” But, no! He said: “Lord, I am not going to deny
You, if the rest do.” Just see where he stands. He stands on a slippery
place, and it will not be long before he will be down. Self-confidence
leads many men to their fall.

We must keep very humble and keep our eyes on the Master, and see that
we do not go to sleep. If we do get asleep, then it won’t be long before
we deny Him. And so we find that when Christ was down in the garden,
sweating great drops of blood, He knew He was hastening to death on the
cross.

Peter went to sleep. And when Jesus came back He said: “Why sleep ye?
Rise and pray, lest ye enter into temptation.” Peter had been with the
Lord three years, but he had to sleep.

The next that happens, for that second step down, we find that Peter
fights in the flesh. When they came to arrest Christ, Peter took out his
sword and cut off the servant’s ear. That servant was the only person who
had suffered through the followers of Christ up to that time. Peter cut
the ear off, but it did not stay off long, for it got back in just about
five minutes.

Jesus cried out: “Peter, put up your sword. If I wanted to defend Myself,
I could call seventy thousand angels down; I could call legions of angels
down; I could defend Myself if I wanted to.” But, no; He did not do that.
He had to rebuke Peter, to put a thorn in his flesh.

The next thing Peter did was to follow Jesus afar off; that is the next
step. When a man gets away from the Savior, then it won’t be long before
he follows Him afar off. You know Peter said, at first, he would keep
close to Him. “I will stand by You; I am willing to die with You,” he had
said. But now Peter changed his mind, and he followed Jesus afar off.

Well, the next thing, we find that Peter is in bad company. That is
another step down. He had got, by this time, down pretty low.

A young lady comes in, looks at Peter, and says: “This man is one of His
disciples.”

“No, I am not; no, not I,” says Peter.

The maid cries out at him in perfect amazement--for perhaps she had heard
him preach some time--and she says: “You _are_ one of His disciples.”

“Oh, no; no, not I.”

He did not know Jesus, who was right there inside, where he could see
him; and yet this man, who was so bold, did not know Him.

Another man comes to Peter and says: “You are one of His disciples.”

“No, Sir--not I. I don’t know Him--no Sir.” You see, he had got a good
ways off.

The man says: “You are.”

“No; I am not.”

About an hour after Peter has denied Him, another man came around and
said: “You are one of His disciples.”

“No; I am not.”

“Oh, but you are. Your speech betrays you.”

Peter had been with the Master three years, and he talked a different
language from those men; and you who have been with God two or three
years know that you talk better than you did before.

This man said: “You are one of those.” And Peter began to curse and
swear, and said he never knew Him.

How did the Lord call him back? Although Satan had been at work on him
for hours and hours, yet the Lord did call him back. The Lord asked him:
“Peter, is it true that you have forgotten Me so soon? Do you remember,
when we walked together by the sea, how I saved you? Do you remember the
time I called you again? Do you remember the wonderful sermon that I
preached on the mount? Is it true, Peter, that you do not know me?”

He might have said these things to Peter, but He did not. He just gave
him one look--and what a look that was! It was a look of love, a look of
tenderness, a look of pity, a look of peace.

He flashed upon Peter.

Peter remembered what he had done to the Lord. Then the cock crew,
and Peter went out and wept bitterly. No one on Earth knows how Peter
suffered in those hours that Christ was laid in the tomb. What hours they
must have been to him! I can imagine that he did not eat any thing; that
he did not sleep; that he spent those hours praying that the Lord might
be given back to him.

At last Sunday morning comes--that blessed morning--and the first thing
Peter hears is that Christ has risen. And He sent word to Peter--one of
the most touching things He did. Just let me read from the sixteenth
chapter of Mark and the seventh verse:

“But go your way, tell His disciples and Peter that He goeth before you
into Galilee; there shall ye see Him, as He said unto you.”

Oh, how tender! I don’t know but if He had said “Go back and tell My
disciples,” Peter would have said: “I am no disciple; I have forfeited
my right as such.” But Jesus said: “Tell My disciples and Peter.” Tell
Peter; put his name in; don’t leave him out.

We are told that Christ had an interview with Peter, and they met alone.
No one ever told us what took place, but I can imagine how Peter felt.
Like the woman that we read about in the seventh chapter of Matthew, He
restored him to salvation and then sent him out to preach.

But when the twelve were at meat together the Lord turned to Peter and
asked: “Lovest thou Me more than these?”

How those words must have cut down into Peter’s heart! Jesus wanted to
see whether his conceit had been taken out. That was hard, you know. He
could not get any thing out of Peter. Peter did not say a word. Again the
Lord asked: “Peter, lovest thou Me more than these?”

He was a broken and empty vessel, and must be filled.

Then Jesus gave Peter his commission: “Go, feed my sheep; preach the
Gospel to all the world.”

This is a sweet thought, that after Peter had denied the Lord, He took
him back and used him!


SAUL.

I have been speaking on the Prodigal Son, but now I want to take up
another man--a much harder case than the prodigal, because he did not
believe he needed a Savior.

You need not have talked a great while to that prodigal before you
could have convinced him that he needed a Savior. It is easy to reach a
prodigal’s heart when he reaches the end of his rope.

The man of whom I shall now speak stood high in the estimation of the
people. He stood, as it were, at the top of the ladder, while the
prodigal was at the bottom. This man was full of self-righteousness, and
if you had tried to pick out a man in Jerusalem as a hopeless case, so
far as accepting Jesus of Nazareth as a Savior, you would have picked out
Saul. He was the most utterly hopeless case you could have found.

I would sooner have thought of the conversion of Pilate than of this man.
When they were putting to death the martyrs to the cross he had cheered
on the murderers; but, in spite of all this, we find the Son of God
coming and knocking at his heart, and it was not long before he received
Him as his Savior.

You can see Saul as he goes to the chief priests of Jerusalem, getting
the necessary documents that he might go to Damascus--that he might go
to the synagogue there and get all who were calling upon the Lord Jesus
Christ cast into prison. He was going to stamp out the teachers of the
New Gospel.

One thing that made him so mad, probably, was that when the disciples
were turned out of Jerusalem, instead of stopping they went all around
and preached.

Philip went down to Samaria, and probably there was a great revival
there, and the news had come from Damascus that the preachers had
actually reached that place.

This man Saul was full of zeal and full of religion. He was a religious
man, and no doubt he could say a prayer as long as any one in Jerusalem.
He had kept the laws faithfully, and been an honest and upright man. The
people then would never have dreamed of him being in need of a Savior.
Many persons today would say of Saul: “He is good enough. To be sure, he
does not believe in Jesus Christ; but he is a good man.”

And there are many people today who do not believe in Him. They feel
if they pay their debts and live a moral life they do not need to be
converted. They do not want to call upon Him; they want to get Jesus and
all His teachings out of the way, as Saul wanted to do. That is what they
have been trying to do for eighteen centuries. Saul just wanted to stamp
them out at one swoop. So he got the necessary papers, and away he went
down to Damascus.

Suppose, as he rode out of the gate of Jerusalem on his mission, any
one had said to Saul: “You are going down to Damascus to prosecute the
preachers of Christ, but you will come back a preacher yourself.” If any
man had said this, his head would not have remained on his shoulders five
minutes. Saul would have protested: “I hate Him--I abhor Him. That is how
I feel.”

Yes, Saul wanted to get Christ and His disciples out of the way. He was
no stranger to Christ. He knew His working, for, as Paul said to Agrippa:
“This thing was not done in a corner.” He knew all about Christ’s
death. Probably he was acquainted with Nicodemus and the members of
the Sanhedrim who were against Christ. Perhaps he was acquainted with
Christ’s disciples, and with all their good deeds. Yet he entertained a
malignant hatred for the Gospel and its propagandists, and he was going
down to Damascus to put all those Christians in prison.

You see Saul as he rides out of Jerusalem with that brilliant escort,
and away he goes through Samaria, where Philip was. He would not speak
to a Samaritan, however. The Jews detested the Samaritans. The idea of
speaking to an adulterous Samaritan would have been repulsive to Saul. So
he rode on, proudly, through the nation, with his head raised, breathing
slaughter to the children of God.

Damascus was about 138 miles from Jerusalem, but we are not told how long
he took for that journey.

Little did Saul think that, nineteen hundred years after, in this
country, then wild, there would be thousands of people gathered just to
hear the story of his journey down to Damascus.

He has arrived at the gates of the city, and is not yet cooled off, as
we say. He is still breathing revenge. See him as he stands before that
beautiful city.

Some one has said Damascus is the most beautiful city in the world, and
we are told that when Mohammed came to it he turned his head away from
it, lest the very beauty of it would take him from his God.

So this young man comes to Damascus, and he tells the hour of his
arrival. He never forgets the hour, for it was then that Christ met him.
He says: “I saw in the way a light from Heaven above the brightness of
the sun.” He saw the light of Heaven, and a glimpse of that light struck
him to the ground. From that light a voice called: “Saul! Saul!” Yes, the
Son of God knows his name. Sinner, God knows your name. He knows all
about you. He knows the street you live in and the number of your house,
because He told where Ananias lived when Paul went there.

“Saul! Saul! Why persecutest thou Me?”

How these words must have gone down into his soul! He stopped. The words
were to him. Could Saul give any reason when the question was put to him:
“Why persecutest thou Me?” Can any sinner give a reason for persecuting
Christ?

I can imagine some of you saying: “I never persecute Christ. I have a
great many sins. I swear often--sometimes drink; but I always speak
respectfully of Christ.” Do you? Do you never speak disrespectfully of
His disciples and God’s children?

When Christ asked Saul that question He might have added: “I lived on
Earth thirty years, and I never did you any hurt or injury; I never even
injured your friends. I came into the world to bless you. Why persecutest
thou Me?”

When this question was put to Saul He supplemented it by saying: “It is
hard for thee to kick against the pricks.” You and I would not have had
any compassion upon Saul if we had been in Christ’s place. We would have
said the hardship is upon the poor Christians in Damascus. But the Lord
saw differently.

In those days, when people did not drive their camels with whips, they
had a stick with a sharp piece of steel at the end, called a prick,
and with this the animal was goaded. Hence the point of the saying is
obvious.


SIMEON.

The Lord was one day at Jerusalem, and a banquet was given him by Simeon.

There was a banquet table in the house, arranged according to the fashion
of that day. Instead of chairs for the guests, the guests sat reclining
on lounges.

Well, it was just one of these repasts that our Lord sat down to, along
with the wealthy Simeon and his many guests. But no sooner had He entered
than a certain woman followed Him into the house. She fell down at His
feet, and began to wash them with her tears.

It was the custom in those days to wash one’s feet on entering a house.
Sandals were worn, and the practice was necessary.

This woman had got into the house by some means, and, once inside, had
quietly stolen up to the feet of the Savior. In her hand was a box; but
her heart, too, was just as full of ointment as the box she carried. And
there was the sweetest perfume as she stole to His feet.

Her tears started to fall down on those sacred feet--hot, scalding tears,
that gushed out like water. She said nothing while the tears fell, and
then she took down her long black hair and wiped His feet with the hair
of her head. And after that she poured out the ointment on His feet.

At once the Pharisees began to talk together. How, all through the New
Testament, these Pharisees kept whispering and talking together!

They said, shaking their heads: “This Man receiveth sinners. Were He a
prophet, He would know who and what manner of woman this is that touches
Him, for she is a sinner.” No prophet, they insisted, would allow that
kind of a woman near him, but would push her away from him.

But Jesus read their thoughts, and quickly rebuked them. He said:
“Simeon, I have something to say to thee.”

Simeon answered: “Master, say on.”

“Seest thou this woman? I entered into thine house, thou gavest me
no water to wash my feet; but she has washed my feet with tears, and
wiped them with the hairs of her head. Thou gavest me no kiss, but this
woman, since I came in, hath not ceased to kiss my feet. My head with
ointment thou didst not anoint, but this woman hath anointed my feet with
ointment.”

Simeon was like many Pharisees nowadays, who say: “Oh, well! We will
entertain that minister if we must. We do not want to, for he is a
dreadful nuisance; but we will have to put up with him. It is our duty to
be patronizing.”

Well, the Master said more to His entertainer, as follows:

“There was a certain creditor which had two debtors. One owed 500 pence
and the other 50 pence, and when he had nothing to pay----”

Mark that, sinner; the debtor had nothing to pay. There is no sinner in
the world who can pay any thing to cancel his debt to God. The great
trouble is that sinners think they can pay--some of them 75 cents on the
dollar, some even feel able to pay 99 cents on the dollar, and the one
cent that they are short they believe can be made up in some manner.
That is not the correct way; it is all wrong; you must throw all the debt
on God. Some few, very likely, will only claim to pay 25 cents on the
dollar, but they are not humble enough, either; they can not begin to
carry out their bargain. Why, sinner, you could not pay one-tenth part of
a single mill of the debt you are under to God.

Now, it is said in this parable the debtors could not pay their creditor
any thing; they had nothing to give, and their creditor frankly forgave
them both.

“Now, Simeon,” the Master asked, “which should love that man the more?”

“I suppose,” was the reply, “he that was forgiven the more.”

“You have rightly judged. This woman loves much because she has been
forgiven much.” And Jesus went on to tell Simeon all about her. I suppose
He wanted to make it plainer to Simeon, and He turned to the poor woman
and said:

“Thy sins are forgiven; go in peace.”

All her sins were forgiven--not simply part of them; not half them, but
every sin from the cradle up. Every impurity is blotted out for time and
eternity.

Yes, truly, she went out in peace, for she went out in the light of
Heaven. With what brightness the light must have come down to her from
those eternal hills! With what beauty it must have flashed on her soul!

Yes, she came to the feet of the Master for a blessing, and she received
it.


THE GOOD SAMARITAN.

We are told that as Jesus stood with His disciples a man, a lawyer, stood
up and tempted Him.

The lawyer asked Jesus this question:

“Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?”

He asked what he could do to inherit eternal life--what he could do to
buy salvation.

Jesus answered his question by asking another question: “What is written
in the law? How readest thou?”

To this the lawyer answered:

“Thou shalt love the Lord God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as
thyself.”

“Thou hast answered right. But who is ‘thy neighbor?’”

Then Jesus drew a vivid picture, which has been told for the last
eighteen hundred years, and I do not know any thing that brings out more
truthfully the wonderful power of the Gospel than this story. It is the
story of the man who went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and who fell
among thieves.

Jerusalem was called the City of Peace. Jericho and the road leading to
it were infested with thieves. Probably it had been taken possession of
by the worst of Adam’s sons.

[Illustration: THE ARRIVAL OF THE GOOD SAMARITAN AT THE INN

From the Painting by Gustave Dore.]

[Illustration: DAVID.--From Statue by Angelo]

I do not know how far the man got from Jerusalem toward Jericho, but the
thieves had come out and fallen upon him, and had taken all his money,
stripped him of his clothing and left him wounded. I suppose they left
him for dead.

By-and-by, a priest came down the road from Jerusalem. We are told that
he came by chance. Perhaps he was going down to dedicate some synagogue
or preach a sermon on some important subject, and had the manuscript in
his pocket.

As he was going along on the other side, he heard a groan. He turned
around, and saw the poor fellow, lying bleeding on the ground, and pitied
him. He went up close, took a look at him, and said: “Why, that man is a
Jew! He belongs to the seed of Abraham. If I remember aright, I saw him
in the synagogue last Sabbath. I pity him; but I have too much business,
and I can not attend to him.”

He felt a pity for him, and looked on him, and probably wondered why God
allowed such men as were those thieves to come into the world. Then he
passed by.

There are many men just like this priest. They stop to discuss and wonder
why sin came into the world, and look upon a wounded man, but do not stop
to pick up a poor sinner--forgetting the fact that sin is in the world
already, and must be rooted out.

Soon another man came along, a Levite, and he also heard the groans of
the robbers’ victim. He, too, turned about and looked upon him with
pity. He felt compassion for him. He was one of those men that, if we
had him here, we would probably make an elder or a deacon. He looked at
the suffering man and said: “Poor fellow! He is all covered with blood!
He has been badly hurt; he is nearly dead; and they have taken all his
money and stripped him naked! Ah, well; I pity him.” He would like to
extend help, but he, too, has very pressing business; and so he passes by
on the other side. But he has scarcely got out of sight when another one
comes along, riding on a beast. He heard the groans of the wounded man,
and went over and took a good look at him.

The traveler was a Samaritan. When he looked down he saw the man was a
Jew.

Ah, how the Jews looked down upon the Samaritans. There was a great, high
partition wall between the Jews and the Samaritans. The Jews would not
allow them in the Temple; they would not have any dealings with them;
they would not associate with them.

I can see him coming along that road, with his good, benevolent face;
and as he passes he hears a groan from the poor fellow. He draws in his
beast, and pauses to listen. “And he came to where he was.”

This is the sweetest thing, to my mind, in the whole story.

A good many people would like to help a poor man if he was on the
platform--if it cost them no trouble. They want him to come to them. They
are afraid to touch the wounded man; he is all over blood, and they will
get their hands soiled.

And that was just the way with the priest and the Levite. This poor
man, perhaps, had paid half of all his means to help the service in the
Temple, and might have been a constant worshiper; but they only felt pity
for him.

This good Samaritan “came to where he was,” and after he saw him he had
compassion on him. That word “compassion”--how sweet it sounds! The first
thing he did on hearing him cry for water--the hot sun had been pouring
down upon his head--was to go and get it from a brook. Then he goes and
gets a bag, that he had with him--what we might call a carpet-bag or a
saddle-bag in the West--and pours in oil on his wounds. Then he says to
himself: “The poor fellow is weak.” So he goes and gets a little wine. He
has been lying so long in the burning sun that he is nearly dead now--he
had been left half dead--and the wine revives him.

The good Samaritan looks him over, and sees all the wounds that need
to be bound up. But he has nothing to do this with. I can see him now,
tearing the lining out of his coat, and with it binding up his wounds.
Then he takes him up and lays him on his bosom until he is revived, and,
when the poor fellow gets strength enough, the good Samaritan puts him on
his own beast.

If the Jew had not been half dead he would never have allowed the
Samaritan to put his hands on him. He would have treated him with scorn.
But he is half dead, and he can not prevent the good Samaritan treating
him kindly and putting him on his beast.

Did you ever stop to think what a strong picture it would have been if
the Samaritan had not been able himself to get the man on the beast--if
he had needed to call any assistance?

Perhaps a man would have come along, and he would have asked him to help
him with the wounded man.

“What are you?”

“I am a Samaritan.”

“You are a Samaritan, are you? I can not help you--I am a Jew.”

There is a good deal of that spirit today--just as strong as it was
then. When we are trying to get a poor man on the right way--when we are
tugging at him to get his face toward Zion--we ask some one to help us,
but he says: “I am a Roman Catholic.”

“Well,” you say, “I am a Protestant.”

So they give no assistance to one another.

The same spirit of old is present today. The Protestants will have
nothing to do with the Catholics; the Jews will have nothing to do with
the Gentiles. And there was a time--but, thank God, we are getting over
it--when a Methodist would not touch a Baptist nor a Presbyterian a
Congregationalist; and if we beheld a Methodist taking a man out of the
ditch, a Baptist was sure to ask:

“What are you going to do with him?”

“Take him to a Methodist church.”

“Well, I’ll have nothing to do with him.”

A great deal of this has gone by, and the time is certainly coming when,
if we are trying to get a man out of the ditch, and they see us tugging
at him, and we are so faint that we can not get him on the beast, they
will help him. And that is what Christ wants.

Well, the Samaritan gets him on his beast, and says to him:

“You are very weak, but my beast is sure-footed; he’ll take you to the
inn, and I’ll hold you.”

He held him firmly, and God is able to hold every one He takes out of the
pit. I see them going along the road, he holding him on, and he gets him
to the inn. He gets him there, and he says to the inn keeper:

“Here is a wounded man; the thieves have been after him; give him the
best attention you can; nothing is too good for him.”

I can imagine the good Samaritan as stopping there all night, sitting up
with him, and attending to his every need. And the next morning he gets
up and says to the landlord:

“I must be off; I leave a little money to pay you for what the man has
had, and if that is not enough I will pay what is necessary when I return
from my business in Jericho.”

This good Samaritan gave this landlord twopence to pay for what he had
got, and promised to come again and repay whatever had been spent to take
care of the man, and he had given him, besides, all his sympathy and
compassion.

Jesus tells this story in answer to the lawyer who came to tempt Him, and
showed that the Samaritan was the neighbor.

Now, this story is brought out here to teach church-goers this thing: It
is not creed or doctrine that we need so much as compassion and sympathy.


THE LEPER.

See that poor leper! Do you know what an awful thing leprosy is? A
disease so terrible that it separates its victim from all the world, and
makes him an outcast, even from his home. Every one is afraid of him.
His disease is so contagious that to touch him or even to breathe the air
near him is dangerous; and so these poor, afflicted wretches have to go
away and live in cave or desert all alone.

They sit by the wayside afar off, calling to the passers-by for
charity--who sometimes throw them a piece of money and hurry off, lest
they also come into that terrible plight.

Here is a poor man who finds the marks of what he thinks is this terrible
disease upon his body. According to the law, he must go to the priest and
be examined.

Alas! The priest says it is leprosy--nothing else.

Now the poor man, with broken heart, turns away from the Temple. He goes
to his house, to say good-by to his wife and to take his children in
his arms once more before he goes away to spend the long years in the
wilderness alone, or with other lepers like himself, until death shall
come to deliver him from his sufferings.

What a sorry house is that! Surely, this is worse than death itself.

He goes out of his door with no hope of ever entering it again. He walks
the street by himself, and if any one comes near he lifts up his voice in
that mournful cry:

“Unclean! Unclean!”

Out of the gates of the city he goes, away from all his friends and
acquaintances, carrying with him the sorrow of separation and the seeds
of death.

One day he sees a crowd passing along the road, but he dares not go near
enough to inquire what it is. All at once he happens to think it may
be that Prophet of Nazareth whom he had heard of--that same Man that,
people said, could open the eyes of blind men, make lame men to walk, and
who had even raised the son of the widow from death, over there at Nain.
If only He were passing! At any rate, he will take the chances, and cry
out after Him; and so he shouts, at the top of his voice:

“Have mercy upon me!”

All the rest of the crowd are afraid of him, but Jesus, who is in the
midst, hears some one calling; and, just as He always did when any one
wanted any thing of Him, He stopped to find out what it was.

He is not afraid of the leper; and so, while the rest of the crowd stand
apart by themselves, He calls the poor fellow up to Him, and asks him
what he wants.

The leper, with his heart full of anxious hope, makes answer:

“Lord, if Thou wilt, Thou canst make me clean.”

Jesus says: “I will; be thou clean.”

A strange sense of health and strength comes suddenly over the man. He
looks at his hands, and finds the leprosy all gone. He begins to pour
out his heart in thanks to Jesus, who sends him away to the priests,
saying: “Go, show thyself to the priests, and offer the gift that Moses
commanded.”

Now, I seem to see that cleansed leper, hurrying off to show himself
to the priest, to be pronounced cured, according to the law; and then
hastening to his little home, to see his wife and children once more. He
bursts into the house, weeping for joy. He stretches out his arms to
his wife and little ones, saying: “I am clean! Jesus did it--Jesus of
Nazareth.”


THE PENITENT THIEF.

I am going to take for my text, this morning, “A Man”--the last one that
Jesus saved before He returned to Heaven.

The fact that Jesus saved such a man at all ought to give every one of us
much hope and comfort. This man was a thief--a highwayman and murderer,
perhaps--and yet Christ takes him with Him when He ascends to glory; and
if Jesus is not ashamed of such a man, surely no class of sinners need to
feel that they are left out.

It is a blessed fact that all kinds of men and women are represented
among the converts in the Gospels, and almost all of them were converted
suddenly.

Very many people object to sudden conversions, but you may read in the
Acts of the Apostles of eight thousand people converted in two days.
That seems to me rather quick work. If all the Christians before me this
morning would only consecrate themselves to the work of Christ, they
might be the means of converting that number before the week is out.

Let us look at Christ hanging on the cross, between two thieves--the
Scribes and Pharisees wagging their heads and jeering at Him, His
disciples gone away, and only His mother and one or two other women in
sight to cheer Him with their presence, among all this concourse of
enemies--relentless and mocking enemies.

Hear those spiteful Pharisees calling out to Jesus: “If Thou be the Son
of God, come down from the cross, and we will believe on Thee.” And the
account says that the two thieves cast the same in His teeth.

So, then, the first thing that we know of our man is that he is a reviler
of Christ. You might reasonably think that he ought to be doing something
else at such a time as this; but, hanging there in the midst of his
tortures, and certain to be dead in a few hours, instead of confessing
his sins and preparing to meet the God whose laws he had broken all his
life--instead of that, he is abusing God’s only Son. Surely, this man can
not sink any lower until he sinks into hell!

The next thing we hear of him, he appears to be under conviction. Nobody
is ever converted until he is convicted.

In the twenty-third chapter of Luke we read:

“And one of the malefactors which were hanged railed on Him, saying:
‘If Thou be the Christ, save Thyself and us.’ But the other, answering,
rebuked him, saying: ‘Dost not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same
condemnation? And we indeed justly, for we receive the due reward of our
deeds; but this man hath done nothing amiss.’”

What, do you suppose, it was that made this great change in this man’s
feelings in these few hours?

Christ had not preached him a sermon--had given him no exhortation. The
darkness had not yet come on; the Earth had not opened its mouth; the
business of death was going on as usual; the crowd was still there,
mocking and hissing and wagging their heads; and yet this man, who in
the morning was railing at Christ, is now confessing his sins.

“We indeed justly.”

No miracle had been wrought before his eyes. The Son of God had not come
down from the cross. No angel from Heaven had come to place a glittering
crown upon His head, in place of the bloody crown of thorns.

What was it, then?

I will tell you what I think it was. I think it was the Savior’s prayer:

“Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.”

I seem to hear this thief talking with himself in this fashion:

“What a strange kind of man this must be! He says He is King of the Jews;
and the superscription on His cross says the same thing. But what sort
of a throne is this? He says He is the Son of God. Why does not God send
down His angels, and destroy all this great gathering of people that
are torturing His Son? If He has all power now, as He used to have when
He worked those miracles they talk about, why does He not bring out His
vengeance, and sweep all these wretches into destruction? I would do it
in a minute, if I had the power. Oh, if I could, I would open the Earth,
and swallow up these tormentors!

“But this man prays to God to ‘forgive them.’

“Strange! Strange! He must be different from the rest of us. I am sorry
that I said one word against Him when they first hung us up here. What a
difference there is between Him and me!

“Here we are, hanging on two crosses--side by side; but all the rest
of our lives we have been far enough apart. I have been robbing and
murdering, but He has been visiting the hungry, healing the sick, and
raising the dead. Now these people are railing at us both. What a strange
world is this!

“I will not rail at Him any more. Indeed, I begin to believe He must be
the Son of God; for, surely, no son of man could forgive his enemies this
way.”

That is what did it, my friends.

This poor man had been scourged and beaten and nailed to the cross, and
hung up there for the world to gaze upon; and he was not sorry for his
sins one single bit--did not feel the least conviction on account of all
that misery. But when he heard the Savior praying for His murderers that
broke his heart.

I remember to have heard a story, somewhere, of a bad boy that had run
away from home. He had given his father no end of trouble. He had refused
all the invitations that his father had sent him to come home and be
forgiven, and help to comfort his old heart. He had even gone so far as
to scoff at his father and mother.

But one day a letter came, telling him his father was dead, and they
wanted him to come home and attend the funeral.

At first he determined he would not go, but then he thought it would be a
shame not to pay some little show of respect to the memory of so good a
man after he was dead; and so, just as a matter of form, he took a train
and went to the old home.

He sat through all the funeral services, saw his kind old father buried,
and came back with the rest of the friends to the house, with his heart
as cold and stony as ever. But when the old man’s will was brought out
to be read, the ungrateful son found that his father had remembered him
along with all the other members of the family in the will, and had left
him an inheritance with the others, who had not gone astray.

This broke his heart.

It was too much for him, that his old father, during all those years in
which he had been so wicked and so rebellious, had never ceased to love
him.

That is just the way our Father in Heaven does with us. That is just the
way Jesus does with people who refuse to give their hearts to Him. He
loves them in spite of their sins, and it is the love which, more than
any thing else, brings hard-hearted sinners to fall upon their knees.

Now, this thief on the cross confessed his sins. A man may be very sorry
for his sins; but, if he does not confess them, he has no promise of
being forgiven. The thief says: “We are suffering justly.” I never knew
any man to be converted until he confessed.

Cain felt bad enough over his sins, but he did not confess.

Saul was greatly tormented in his mind, but he went to the Witch of Endor
rather than to the Lord.

Judas felt so bad over the betrayal of his Master that he went out and
hanged himself; but he did not confess--that is, he did not confess to
God. He came back and confessed to the priests, saying: “I have sinned in
that I have betrayed the innocent blood.” It was of no use to confess to
them; they could not forgive him. What he should have done was to confess
to God; but instead of that, he rushed out and hanged himself.

How different is the case with the penitent thief! He confesses his sins
to Christ, and Christ has mercy on him at once.

Just here is one of the great difficulties with many people. They do not
like to come up face to face with their sins. They do not like to own
that they are sinners. They excuse themselves in every way. They think
they are not very bad sinners; that there are a great many worse than
they are; and so they try to cover up the great fact that this penitent
thief confesses openly. My friends, you never will be saved, so long as
you try to cover up your sins.

We have heard a great deal about the faith of Abraham and the faith of
Moses; but this man seems to me to have had more faith than any of them.
He stands at the head of his class.

God was twenty-five years toning up the faith of Abraham; Moses was
forty years getting ready for his work; but this thief, right here in
the midst of men who rejected Him--nailed to the cross and racked with
pain in every nerve, overwhelmed with horror, and his soul in a perfect
tempest--still manages to lay hold upon Christ, and trust in Him for a
swift salvation. His heart goes out to the Savior. How glad he would be
to fall on his knees at the foot of that cross, and pour out his prayer
to Him who was hanging on it! But this he can not do. His hands and feet
are nailed fast to the wood; but they can not nail his eyes, nor his
heart. He can, at least, turn his head, and look upon the Son of God;
and his breaking heart can go out in love to the One who is dying beside
him--dying for him, and dying for you and me.

And what did Jesus say in answer to his prayer?

That prayer was a confession of Christ. He calls Jesus “Lord,” and begs
to be remembered in His kingdom. That must be a kingdom in Heaven--for,
surely, there was no chance of a kingdom on Earth, as matters looked at
that time.

Christ fulfilled His promise to the thief:

“Whoso confesseth Me before men, him will I confess before my Father and
the holy angels.”

He looks kindly upon him, and says:

“Today thou shalt be with Me in Paradise.”

And now the darkness falls upon the Earth; the Sun hides itself; but,
worse than all, the Father hides His face from the Son. What else is the
meaning of that bitter cry?

“My God! My God! Why hast Thou forsaken Me?”

Ah! It had been written:

“Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree.”

Jesus is made a curse for us. God can not look upon sin; and now His own
Son is bearing, in His own body, the sins of the world; and so He can not
look upon Him.

I think that was what was heaviest upon the Savior’s heart, away there in
the Garden, when He prayed: “If it be possible, let this cup pass away
from Me.”

He could bear the unfaithfulness of His friends, the spite of His
enemies, the pain of His crucifixion and the shadow of death. He could
bear all these. But when it came to the hiding of His Father’s face,
that seemed almost too much for even the Son of God to bear. But even
this He endured for our sins; and now the face of God is turned back to
us, whose sins had turned it away, and looking upon Jesus, the sinless
One, He sees our souls in Him.

In the midst of all His agony, how sweet it must have been to Christ to
hear that poor thief confessing Him! He likes to have men confessing Him.

Do you remember His asking Peter: “Who do men say that I am?”

Peter answered: “Some people say You are Moses; some people say You are
Elias, and some people say You are one of the old prophets.”

He asked again: “But, Peter, who do you say that I am?”

And when Peter said “Thou art the Son of God,” Jesus blessed him for that
confession.

And now this thief confesses Him--confesses Him in the darkness. Perhaps
it is so dark he can not see Him any longer; but he feels that He is
there beside him.

This poor thief did as much for Christ in that one act as if he had lived
and worked for Him fifty years. That is what Christ wants of us--to
confess Him; in the dark as well as in the light, and when it is hard as
well as when it is easy. For He was not ashamed of us, and carried our
sins even unto death.

Just look for a minute at the prayer of this penitent thief.

He calls Jesus “Lord.” That sounds like a young convert. “Lord, remember
me when Thou comest into Thy kingdom.” Not a very long prayer, you see,
but a prevailing prayer.

Some people think they must have a form of prayer--a prayer book,
perhaps--if they are going to address the Throne of Grace properly. But
what would that poor fellow do with a prayer book up there--hanging on
the cross, his hands nailed fast to the wood? Suppose it were necessary
that some minister or priest should pray for him, what is he going to
do? There is nobody there to pray for him, and he is going to die within
a few hours. He is out of reach of help from men, but God has laid help
upon One who is mighty, and that One is close at hand.

Then look at the answer to his prayer. The supplicant received more
than he asked. He only asked to be remembered when Christ came into His
kingdom. But Christ said to him: “I will take you right up with Me into
My kingdom today.”

The Savior wants us all to remember Him in His old kingdom--to remember
Him in the breaking of bread and in the drinking of wine--and then He
will remember us in the new kingdom.

Just think of this, my friends. The last the world ever saw of Christ
He was on the cross. The last business of His life was the saving of a
poor penitent thief. That was a part of His triumph; that was one of the
glories attending His death.

No doubt Satan said to himself: “I will have the soul of that thief,
pretty soon, down here in the caverns of the lost. He belongs to me; he
has belonged to me all these years.”

[Illustration: JACOB, TENDING FLOCKS OF LABAN.--From the Painting by
Gustave Dore.]

[Illustration: MOSES, BREAKING THE TABLES OF THE LAW

From the Painting by Gustave Dore.]

But Christ snapped the fetters of his soul, and set him at liberty; Satan
lost his prey. “The Lion of the tribe of Judah” conquered the lion of
hell.

You know that in the British colonies, before the day of Wilberforce,
there used to be a great many slaves; but that good man began to agitate
the question of setting them free; and all the slaves in the colonies,
when they heard of it, were very anxious to hear how he was getting
along. They knew the bill was before Parliament, and with them it was a
question next to that of life itself.

But in those days there were no telegraphs and no steamships. The mails
went by the slow sailing vessels. They would be from six to eight months
in making the voyage to some of the more distant of the colonies. The
slaves used to watch for the white sails of British ships, hoping to hear
good reports, and also fearing they might hear bad ones.

There was a ship that had sailed immediately after the Emancipation
Act had been passed and signed by the king; and when she came within
hailing distance of the boats that had put off from the shore at the port
of her destination, the captain could not wait to deliver the message
officially, and have it duly promulgated by the government; but, seeing
the anxious men standing up in their boats, eager for the news, he placed
his trumpet to his mouth, and shouted with all his might:

“Free! Free!”

Just so the angels shouted when this poor bondman of Satan’s, almost
in the jaws of the pit, was taken in hand by the Savior Himself;
delivered from the bondage of darkness into the liberty of His dear Son!
Free--free from sin--free from the curse of the law--free, too, in a
short time, from the bonds of the flesh.

What a contrast! In the morning he is led out a condemned criminal; in
the evening he is saved from his sins. In the morning he is cursing;
in the evening he is singing hallelujahs with a choir of angels. In
the morning he is condemned by men as not fit to live on Earth; in the
evening he is reckoned good enough for Heaven.

Christ was not ashamed to walk arm-in-arm with him along the golden
pavements of the Eternal City.

He had heard the Savior’s cry: “It is finished.” He had seen the spear
thrust into His side. Jesus had died before his very eyes, and hastened
before him to get a place ready for this first soul brought from the
world after He had died.

You have heard of the child that did not like to die and go to
Heaven, because he did not know anybody there. But the thief had one
acquaintance--even the Master of the place. He calls to Gabriel, and says:

“Prepare a chariot; make haste! There is a friend of Mine hanging upon
that cross. They are breaking his legs; he soon will be ready to come.
Make haste and bring him to Me.”

And the angel in the chariot sweeps down the sky, takes up the soul of
the poor penitent thief, and hastens back again to glory; while the gates
of the city swing wide open, and the angels shout their welcome to this
poor sinner--“washed in the blood of the Lamb.”

And that, my friends, is just what Christ wants to do for every sinner.
He wants to save you. That is the business on which He came down from
Heaven. That is why He died; and if He gives such great and swift
salvation to this poor thief on the cross, surely He will give you the
same deliverance, if, like the penitent thief, you will repent, confess
and trust in the Savior.

Somebody says that this man “was saved at the eleventh hour.” I do not
know about that. Perhaps it was the first hour. It might have been the
first hour with him, I think. Perhaps he never knew Christ until he was
led out to die beside Him. This may have been the very first time he had
ever learned the way of faith in the Son of God.

But how many of you gave your hearts to Christ the very first time He
asked them of you? Are you not farther along in the day than even that
poor thief?

A little while ago, in one of the mining districts of England, a young
man attended one of our meetings, and refused to go from the place till
he had found peace in the Savior. The next day he went down into the pit,
and the coal fell in upon him; and when they took him out he was broken
and mangled, and had only about two or three minutes of life left in him.
His friends gathered about him, saw his lips moving, and, bending down
their ears to catch his words, this was what they heard him say: “It was
a good thing I settled it last night.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Begin now to confess your sins, and to pray the Lord to remember you when
He cometh into His kingdom.


THE PHARISEE AND THE PUBLICAN.

In this first parable we are told that men ought to pray always and
everywhere; that prayer should not be left to a few in the churches, but
all men ought to pray.

Jesus gives us a picture, so that we may understand in what spirit we
ought to pray.

Two men went up to the Temple--one to pray to himself and the other to
pray to God.

I think it will be safe to divide the audience into two bodies, and put
them under these two heads. However, whether we divide the audience or
not, we come under these two heads--those who have the spirit of the
publican and those who have the spirit of the Pharisee.

You can find that the entire community may be correctly divided into
these two classes. The spirit of the prodigal and the spirit of an elder
brother are still in the world; the spirits of Cain and Abel are still in
the world, and these two are representative men.

One of them trusted in his own righteousness and the other did not have
any trust in it, and I say I think all men will come under these two
heads. They have either given up all their self-righteousness--renounced
it all and turned their backs upon it--or else they are clinging to their
own righteousness; and you will find that these self-righteous men that
are ever clinging to their own righteousness are continually measuring
themselves by their neighbors.

“I thank God that I am not as other men are.”

This was the spirit of that Pharisee, and this is the spirit today of
one class in this community, and the other class comes under the head of
this other man.

Let us look at the man Christ pictured first.

It is evident that he was full of egotism--full of conceit--full of
pride; and I believe, as I have said before on this platform, that is one
of the greatest enemies the Son of God has today, and I believe it keeps
more men from the kingdom of God than any thing else.

Pride can grow on any soil, in any climate. No place is too hot for it,
and no place is too cold for its growth. How much misery it has caused in
this world! How many men here are kept from salvation by pride!

Why, it sprung up into Heaven, and for it Lucifer was cast out; by pride
Nebuchadnezzar lost his throne. As he walked through Babylon he cried:
“Is not this a great Babylon which I have built?” And he was hurled from
his throne.

How many men that have become drunkards, who are all broken up--will
gone, health gone--and yet are just as full of pride as the sun is of
light! It will not let them come to Christ and be saved.

A great many live like this Pharisee--only in the form of religion; they
do not want the wheat--only the husk; they do not want the kernel--only
the shell.

How many men are today just living on empty form! They say their prayers,
but they do not mean any thing.

Why, this Pharisee said plenty of prayers, but how did he pray? He prayed
to himself. He might as well have prayed to a post. He did not pray to
God, who knew his heart a thousand times better than he himself did. He
thought he knew himself; he forgot that he was a sepulcher, full of dead
men’s bones; forgot that his heart was rotten, corrupt and vile; and he
comes and spreads out his hands and looks up to Heaven.

Why, the very angels in Heaven veil their faces before God as they cry:
“Holy, holy, holy!”

But this Pharisee comes into the Temple and spreads out his hands, and
says:

“Lord, I thank Thee that I am not as other men are. I fast twice a week.”

He set before God what he had done in comparison with other men, and was
striking a balance and making out God to be his debtor, as thousands are
doing today; and then he says: “I give one-tenth of all I possess.”

I suppose if he was living in Chicago now, and we had gone to him and
asked him for a donation to help put up this Tabernacle, he would have
said:

“Well, I think it will do good; yes, I think it will. It may reach the
vagabonds and outcasts--I do not need it, of course--but if it will reach
that class it will do good. I will give $50, especially if you can get it
in the morning papers--if you can have it announced: ‘John Jones gave $50
to build the Tabernacle.’”

That is the way some of the people give donations to God’s cause; they
give in a patronizing way. But in this manner God will not accept it. If
your heart does not go with your gift, God will not accept it.

This Pharisee says: “I give one-tenth of all that I have; I keep up the
services in the Temple; I fast twice a week.”

He fasted twice a week, although once was only called for, and he thought
because of this he was far above other men. A great many people nowadays
think because they do not eat meat on Fridays, but only fish, they
deserve great credit, although they go on sinning all the week.

Look at this prayer! There is no confession there. He had got so bad, and
the devil had so covered up his sins, that he was above confession.

The first thing we have to do when we come to God is to confess. If there
is any sin clustering around the heart, bear in mind we can have no
communion with God. It is because we have sin about our hearts that our
prayers do not go any higher than our head. We can not get God’s favor if
we have any iniquity in our hearts.

People, like the Pharisee, have only been educated to pray. If they did
not pray every night their consciences would trouble them, and they would
get out of bed and say their prayers; but the moment they get off their
knees, perhaps, you may hear them swearing.

A man may just as well get a string of beads and pray to them. It would
do him as much good.

This Pharisee’s prayer showed no spirit of contrition; there was no
petition; he did not ask any thing from God. This is a queer kind of
prayer:

“Lord, I thank Thee that I am not as other men are--extortionate, unjust,
adulterous--or even as the poor publican.”

Not a petition in his prayer. It was a prayerless prayer--it was
downright mockery. But how many men have just got into that cradle and
been rocked to sleep by the devil!

A short time ago I put this question to a man:

“Are you a Christian?”

“Of course I am; I say my prayers every night.”

“But do you ever pray?”

“Didn’t I tell you I prayed?”

“But do you ever pray?”

“Why, of course I do; haven’t I said so?”

I found that he prayed, but he only went through the form, and, after a
little, I found that he had been in the habit of swearing.

“How is this?” I asked. “Swearing and praying! Do your prayers ever go
any higher than your head?”

“Well, I have sometimes thought that they did not.”

My friends, if you are not in communion with God your prayers are but
forms; you are living in formalism, and your prayers will go no higher
than your head.

How many people just go through the form! They can not rest unless they
say their prayers. How many are there with whom it is only a matter of
education?

But this Pharisee trusted in his own righteousness; he ignored the mercy
of God and the love of Jesus. He was measuring himself by his own rule.
Now, if you want to measure yourself, do it by God’s law--by God’s
requirements.

A great many people have a rule of their own, by which they measure
themselves, and by that rule they are perfectly ready and willing to
forgive themselves.

So it was with this Pharisee. The idea of coming to God and asking His
forgiveness never enters his mind.

While talking to a man--one of those Pharisees--some time ago, about God
and the need of Christ, he said to me:

“I can do without Christ; I do not want Him. I am ready to stand before
God any time.”

That man was trusting in his own righteousness.

Now, take a good look at this Pharisee. You know, I have an idea that the
Bible is like an album. I go into a man’s house, and, while waiting for
him, I take up an album from a table and open it.

I look at a picture.

“Why, that looks like a man I know.”

I turn over and look at another.

“Well, I know that man.”

By-and-by, I come upon another.

“Why, that man looks like my brother.”

I am getting pretty near home. I keep turning over the leaves.

“Well, I declare! Here is a man who lives in the same street I do. Why,
he is my next-door neighbor.”

Then I come upon another, and I see--myself.

My friends, if you read your Bibles, you will find your own pictures
there. It will just describe you.

Now, it may be there is some Pharisee here tonight. If there is, let
him turn to the third chapter of John, and see what Christ said to the
Pharisee:

“Except a man be born again, he can not enter the kingdom of God.”

Nicodemus, no doubt, was one of the fairest specimens of a man in
Jerusalem in those days, yet he had to be born again, else he could not
enter into the kingdom of God.

“But,” you may say, “I am not a Pharisee. I am a poor and miserable
sinner--too bad to come to Him.” Well, turn to the woman of Samaria, and
see what He said to her.

See what a difference there was between that publican and that Pharisee.
There was as great a distance between them as between the Sun and the
Moon.

One was in the very highest station, and the other occupied the very
worst station. One had only himself and his sins to bring to God, and the
other was trying to bring in his position and his aristocracy.

I tell you, when a man gets a true sight of himself, all his position and
station and excellences drop.

See this prayer:

“I thank God.”

“I am not.”

“I fast.”

“I give.”

“I possess.”

Why, if he had delivered a long prayer, and the copy had been put into
the printers’ hands, they would have had to send out for some “I’s.”

“I thank God,” “I,” “I,” “I.”

When a man prays--not with himself, but to God--he does not exalt
himself; he does not pass a eulogy on himself. He falls flat down in the
dust before God. In that prayer you do not find him thanking God for what
He had done for him. It was a heartless and prayerless prayer--merely a
form.

I hope the day will come when formal prayer will be a thing of the past.
I think the reason why we can not get more people out to the meetings is
because we have too many formal prayers in the churches. These formal
Christians get up, like this Pharisee, and thank God that they are better
than other men; but when a man gets a look at himself he comes in the
spirit of the publican.

You see this Pharisee standing and praying with himself, but God could
not give him any thing. He was too full of egotism--too full of himself.
There was no religion in it. God could not bless him.

Now, for a moment, take a look at that poor publican. Just give his
prayer your attention.

There was no capital “I” there--no exalting of himself. “God be merciful
to this Pharisee; God be merciful to the other people who have injured
me; God be merciful to the church members who have not been true to their
belief.”

Was that his prayer?

Thank God, he got to himself. “God be merciful to me, a sinner.” It was
very short. He had got his eye upon himself; he saw that his heart was
vile; he could not lift his eyes to Heaven. But, thank God, he could lift
his heart to Heaven.

There is not a poor publican in the audience tonight but can send up this
prayer. No matter what your past life has been--no matter if it has been
as black as hell--if you but send up the prayer it will be heard. He did
not buy his own righteousness; and God heard his appeal.

Spurgeon, speaking of that publican, said he had the soundest theology of
any man in England. He came before God, struck his hand on his heart, and
cried: “God be merciful to me, a sinner.”


THE WIDOW’S SON.

Think of that poor widow at Nain.

She is an old woman now; and her only son, who is the staff of her life,
is sick.

How she watches him; sits up all night to see that he has his medicine at
the right time; sits by his bedside all day, fanning him, keeping away
the flies, moistening his parched lips with water!

Every thing he asks for she brings.

The very best doctor in Nain is sent for; and when he comes and feels the
pulse of the young man and looks at his tongue, he shakes his head; and
then the poor woman knows there is no hope for her boy.

What an awful thought!

“My son--my only son--must die! What will become of me then?”

Sure enough, the doctor is right; and in a little while the fever comes
to its crisis, and the poor boy dies, with his head upon his mother’s
bosom.

The people come in and try to comfort the bereaved mother; but it is of
no use. Her heart is broken; and she wishes she were dead, too.

Some of you know what it is to look your last upon the faces of those you
love. Some of you mothers have wept hot tears upon the cold faces of your
sons.

Well, they make him ready for burial; and when the time comes, they
celebrate the funeral service, and place him on a bier to carry him away
to the grave.

What a sad procession!

Just as they come out of the city gates, they see a little company of
thirteen dusty-looking travelers, coming up the road.

There is One among them who is tall and far fairer than the sons of men.

Who can He be?

He is moved with compassion when He sees this little funeral procession;
and it does not take Him long to find out that this woman who walks next
the bier is a poor widow, whose only son she is following in sadness to
the grave.

He tells the bearers to put down the bier; and while the mother wonders
what is to be done, He bends tenderly over the dead man, and speaks to
him in a low and sweet voice:

“Arise!”

And the dead man hears Him. His body begins to move; the man that was
dead is struggling with his grave clothes; they unbind them, and now he
sits up.

He leaps off the bier, catches sight of his mother, remembers that he was
dead and is now alive again. He takes his mother in his arms, kisses her
again and again, and then turns to look at the Stranger who has wrought
this miracle upon him.

He is ready to do any thing for that Man--ready to follow Him to the
death. But Jesus does not ask that of him. He knows his mother needs him;
and so He does not take him away to be one of His disciples, but gives
him back to his old mother.

I would have liked to see that young man re-entering the city of Nain,
arm-in-arm with his mother. What do you suppose he said to the people,
who looked at him with wonder? Would he not confess that Jesus of
Nazareth had raised him from the dead? Would he not go everywhere,
declaring what the Lord had done for his dead body?

Oh, how I love to preach Christ, who can stand over all the graves, and
say to all the dead bodies: “Arise!”

          XXX
          XXX
          XXX
          XXX
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
          XXX
          XXX
          XXX
          XXX
          XXX
          XXX
          XXX
          XXX
          XXX


ROCK OF AGES.

    Rock of Ages, cleft for me,
    Let me hide myself in Thee!
    Let the water and the blood
    From Thy riven side which flowed
    Be of sin the double cure--
    Cleanse from guilt and make me pure.

    In my hand no price I bring;
    Simply to Thy cross I cling.
    Naked--come to Thee for dress;
    Helpless--look to Thee for grace;
    Foul--I to Thy fountain fly;
    Cleanse me, Savior, or I die!

    Not the labors of my hands
    Can fulfill Thy law’s demands.
    Could my zeal no respite know--
    Could my tears for ever flow--
    All for sin could not atone;
    Thou must save, and Thou alone!

    While I draw this fleeting breath,
    When my eye-strings break in death,
    When I soar to worlds unknown,
    See Thee on Thy judgment throne--
    Rock of Ages, cleft for me,
    Let me hide myself in Thee!


WHERE HE LEADS I’LL FOLLOW.

    Sweet are the promises, kind is the word--
    Dearer far than any message man ever heard!
    Pure was the mind of Christ--sinless I see;
    He the great example is, and pattern for me.

    Where He leads I’ll follow--
      Follow all the way!
    Where He leads I’ll follow--
      Follow Jesus every day!

    Sweet is the tender love Jesus has shown--
    Sweeter far than any love that mortals have known!
    Kind to the erring one, faithful is He;
    He the great example is, and pattern for me!

    Where He leads I’ll follow--
      Follow all the way!
    Where He leads I’ll follow--
      Follow Jesus every day!

    List to His loving words: “Come unto Me.”
    Weary, heavy-laden, there is sweet rest for thee!
    Trust in His promises--faithful and sure;
    Lean upon the Savior, and thy soul is secure.

    Where He leads I’ll follow--
      Follow all the way!
    Where He leads I’ll follow--
      Follow Jesus every day!




BIBLE CHARACTERS

AS DEPICTED BY THE BRILLIANT AND NOTED PREACHER, T. DE WITT TALMAGE.


ATHALIAH

Grandmothers are more lenient with their children’s children than they
were with their own.

At forty years of age, if discipline be necessary, chastisement is used;
but at seventy, the grandmother, looking upon the misbehavior of the
grandchild, is apologetic and disposed to substitute confectionery for
whip.

There is nothing more beautiful than this mellowing of old age toward
childhood. Grandmother takes out her pocket handkerchief and wipes
her spectacles and puts them on, and looks down into the face of her
mischievous and rebellious descendant, and says:

“I don’t think he meant to do it; let him off this time; I’ll be
responsible for his behavior in the future.”

My mother, with the second generation around her--a boisterous crew--said
one day: “I suppose they ought to be disciplined, but I can not do it.
Grandmothers are not fit to bring up grandchildren.”

But here we have a grandmother of a different hue.

I have been at Jerusalem, where the occurrence that I shall describe took
place, and the whole scene came vividly before me while I was going over
the site of the ancient Temple and climbing the towers of the king’s
palace.

Here is old Athaliah, the queenly murderess.

She ought to have been honorable. Her father was a king. Her husband
was a king. Her son was a king. And yet we find her plotting for the
extermination of the entire royal family, including her own grandchildren.

The executioner’s knives are sharpened; the palace is red with the blood
of princes and princesses. On all sides are shrieks, and hands thrown up,
and struggle and death groan. No mercy! Kill! Kill!

But while the ivory floors of the palace run with carnage and the whole
land is under the shadow of a great horror, a fleet-footed woman--a
clergyman’s wife, Jehosheba by name--stealthily approaches the imperial
nursery, seizes upon the grandchild that had, somehow, as yet escaped
massacre, wraps it up tenderly but in haste, snuggles it against her,
flies down the palace stairs--her heart in her throat, lest she be
discovered in this Christian abduction.

Get her out of the way as quickly as you can, for she carries a precious
burden--even a young king.

With this youthful prize she presses into the room of the ancient Temple,
the church of olden time, unwraps the young king and puts him down, sound
asleep as he is, and unconscious of the peril that has been threatened;
and there for six years he is kept secreted in that church apartment.

Meanwhile, old Athaliah smacks her lips with satisfaction and thinks that
all the royal family are dead.

But the six years expire, and it is now time for the young Joash to come
forth and take the throne, and to push back into disgrace and death old
Athaliah.

The arrangements are all made for political revolution. The military come
and take full possession of the Temple, swear loyalty to the boy Joash,
and then stand around for his defense. See the sharpened swords and
burnished shields! Every thing is ready.

Now Joash, half affrighted at the armed tramp of his defenders, scared at
the vociferation of his admirers, is brought forth in full regalia. The
scroll of authority is put into his hands, the coronet of government is
put on his brow, and the glad people clap and wave, huzza and trumpet.

Athaliah is aroused, and asks:

“What is that? What is that sound over there in the Temple?”

She hurries out to see, and on the way they meet her and say:

“Why, haven’t you heard? You thought you had slain all the royal family,
but Joash has come to light.”

Then the queenly murderess, frantic with rage, laid hold on her mantle
and tore it to tatters, and cried out until she foamed at the mouth:

“You have no right to crown my grandson. You have no right to take the
government from my shoulders. Treason! Treason!”

While she stood there, making this cry, the military started for her
arrest, and she took a short cut through a back door of the Temple and
ran through the royal stables; but the battle-axes of the military fell
on her in the barn-yard, and for many a day, when the horses were being
unloosed from the chariot after drawing out young Joash, the fiery steeds
would snort and rear while passing the place, as they smelt the taint.

The first thought which I hand you from this subject is that the
extermination of righteousness is an impossibility.

When a woman is good she is apt to be very good, and when she is bad she
is apt to be very bad; and this Athaliah was one of the latter sort.
She would exterminate the last scion of the house of David, through
whom Jesus was to come. There was plenty of work for embalmers and
undertakers. She would clear the land of all God-fearing and God-loving
people. She would put an end to every thing that could in any wise
interfere with her imperial criminality.

Athaliah folds her hands and says: “The work is done; it is completely
done.”

Is it?

In the swaddling clothes of that church apartment are wrapped the cause
of God and the cause of good government.

That is the scion of the house of David; it is Joash, the Christian
reformer; it is Joash, the friend of God; it is Joash, the demolisher of
Baalitish idolatry. Rock him tenderly; nurse him gently.

Athaliah, you may kill all the other children, but you can not kill him.
Eternal defenses are thrown all around him, and this clergyman’s wife,
Jehosheba, will snatch him up from the palace nursery, and will run up
and down with him into the house of the Lord, and there she will hide him
for six years, and at the end of that time he will come forth for your
dethronement and utter obliteration.


DAVID.

David, the shepherd boy, is watching his father’s sheep.

They are pasturing on the very hills where afterward a Lamb was born of
which you have heard much--“the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of
the world.”

David, the shepherd boy, was beautiful, brave, musical and poetic. I
think he often forgot the sheep in his reveries. There in the solitude he
struck the harp-string that is thrilling through all ages. David the boy
was at work gathering the material for David the poet and for David the
man.

Like other boys, David was fond of using his knife among the saplings,
and he had noticed the exuding of the juice of the tree; and when he
became a man he said: “The trees of the Lord are full of sap.”

David the boy, like other boys, had been fond of hunting the birds’
nests, and he had driven the old stork off the nest to find how many eggs
were under her; and when he became a man he said: “As for the stork, the
fir trees are her house.”

In boyhood he had heard the terrific thunder storm that frightened the
red deer into premature sickness; and when he became a man he said: “The
voice of the Lord maketh the hinds to calve.”

David the boy had lain upon his back, looking up at the stars and
examining the sky, and to his boyish imagination the sky seemed like a
piece of divine embroidery, the divine fingers working in the threads of
light and the beads of stars; and when he grew up he wrote:

“When I consider Thy heavens, the work of Thy fingers.”

When he became an old man, thinking of the goodness of God, he seemed
to hear again the bleating of his father’s sheep across many years, and
to think of the time when he tended them on the Bethlehem hills, and he
cries out: “The Lord is my shepherd.”

There is one scene in the life of David that you may not have pondered.

You have seen him with a harp, playing the devil out of Saul; with a
sling, smashing the skull of Goliath; with a sword, hacking to pieces the
Philistines; with a scepter, ruling a vast realm; with a psalm, gathering
all nations into doxology.

But now we have David playing the fool.

He has been anointed king, yet he is in exile and is passing incognito
among the Gathites. They are beginning to suspect who he is, and they say:

“I wonder if this is not the warrior, King David? It looks like him. Is
not this the man about whom they used to make poetry, and about whom they
composed a dance, so that the maidens of the city, reeling now on one
foot and now on the other, used to sing: ‘Saul has slain his thousands,
but David has slain his tens of thousands’? Yes, he is very much like
David; he must be David; he is David.”

David, to escape their hands, pretends to be demented; and he said within
himself:

“If I act crazily, then these people will not injure me. No one would be
so much of a coward as to assault a madman.”

So, one day, while these Gathites are watching King David with increased
suspicion, they see him standing by the door, running his hands
meaninglessly up and down the panels--scrabbling on the door as though he
would climb up, his mouth wide open, drooling like an infant.

I suppose the boys of the streets threw missiles at him, but the sober
people of the town said:

“This is not fair. Do you not see that he has lost his reason? Do not
touch this madman. Hands off! Hands off!”

So David escaped. But what an exhibition he made of himself before all
the ages!

There was a majesty in King Lear’s madness after Regan and Goneril, his
daughters, had persuaded him to banish their sister, Cordelia, and all
the friends of the drama have been thrilled with that spectacle.

The craziness of Meg Merrilies was weird and imposing, and formed the
most telling passage in Sir Walter Scott’s “Guy Mannering.”

There was a fascination about the insanity of Alexander Cruden, who
made the best concordance of the Bible that the world ever saw--made it
between the mad houses.

But there was nothing grand, nothing weird, nothing majestic, nothing
sublime about this simulation on the part of David. Instead of trusting
in the Lord, as he had trusted on other occasions, he gathers before
him a vast audience of all generations that were to come, and, standing
on that conspicuous stage of history, in view of all the ages, he
impersonates the slavering idiot.

Taking the behavior of David as a suggestion, I wish to show you how
many of the wise, the brave and the regal sometimes play the fool. Those
men as badly play the fool as did David who, in any crisis of life, take
their case out of the hand of God.

David, in this case, acted as though there were no God to lift him out of
the predicament. What a contrast between his behavior, when this brave
little man stood up in front of the giant ten feet in height, looking
into his face, and this time, when he debased himself and bedraggled his
manhood by affecting insanity in order that he might escape from the grip
of the Gathites! In the one case, he played the hero; in the other case,
he played the fool.

There came a time when David fled from his pursuers. The world runs very
fast when it is chasing a good man. The country is trying to catch David,
and to slay him. David goes into the house of a priest, and asks him for
a sword or spear with which to defend himself.

The priest, not being accustomed to use deadly weapons, tells David
that he can not supply him; but suddenly the priest thinks of an old
sword that had been carefully wrapped up and laid away--the very sword
that Goliath formerly used. He takes down that sword, and while he is
unwrapping the sharp, glittering and memorable blade it flashes upon
David’s mind that this is the very sword that was used against himself
when he was in the fight with Goliath, and David can hardly keep his hand
off it until the priest has unwound it.

David stretches out his hand toward that old sword, and says: “There is
none like it; give it me.” In other words: “I want in my own hand the
sword that has been used against me, and against the cause of the Lord.”
So it was given him.

Here passes through these streets, as in imagination I see him, a
wonderful man. Can it be that I am in the very city where lived and
reigned David--conqueror, king and poet? David--great for power and great
for grief!

He was wrapped up in his boy, Absalom, who was a splendid boy, judged by
the rules of worldly criticism. From the crown of his head to the sole of
his foot there was not a single blemish. The Bible says that he had such
a luxuriant shock of hair that, when once a year it was shorn, what was
cut off weighed over three pounds.

But, notwithstanding all his brilliancy of appearance, he was a bad
boy, and broke his father’s heart. He was plotting to get the throne of
Israel. He had marshaled an army to overthrow his father’s government.

The day of battle had come; the conflict was begun. David, the father,
sat between the gates of the palace, waiting for tidings of the conflict.

Oh, how rapidly his heart beat with emotion! Two great questions were to
be decided--the safety of his boy and the continuance of the throne of
Israel.

After a while a servant, standing on the top of the house, looks off,
and he sees some one running. He is coming with great speed, and the man
on top of the house announces the coming of the messenger.

David watches and waits, and as soon as the messenger from the field
of battle comes within hailing distance the father cries out. Is it a
question in regard to the establishment of his throne? Does he say: “Have
the armies of Israel been victorious? Am I to continue in my imperial
authority? Have I overthrown my enemies?” Oh, no.

There is one question that springs from his heart to his lip, and springs
from the lip into the ear of the besweated and bedusted messenger flying
from the battle field--the question:

“Is the young man--Absalom--safe?”

When it was told to King David that, although his army had been
victorious, his son had been slain, the father turned his back upon the
congratulations of the nation, and went up the stairs of his palace, his
heart breaking as he went, wringing his hands sometimes, and then again
pressing them against his temples, as though he would press them in,
crying:

“O Absalom! My son! My son! Would to God I had died for thee, O Absalom!
My son! My son!”

       *       *       *       *       *

Stupendous grief of David, resounding through all succeeding ages!


DEBORAH.

A text of five words, and four of them one and the same, is found in the
fifth chapter and twelfth verse of Judges: “Awake, awake, Deborah; awake,
awake!”

It seems that the men of Israel had lost their courage. Trampled into the
dust by their oppressors, the cowards had not spirit to rise.

Their vineyards destroyed, their women dishonored, their children slain,
the land was dying for a leader worthy of the cause.

A holy woman by the name of Deborah saw the desolation, and, putting her
trust in the Lord, sounded the battle-cry, and by the help of General
Barak launched into the plain ten thousand armed men.

The Canaanites, of course, came out with a larger force. They came out
against Israel with nine hundred iron chariots, each of these iron
chariots having attached to the sides of it long and sharp scythes, so
that when these engines of war were driven down to battle, each one of
the nine hundred was ready to cut two great swaths of death.

But, when God gives a mission to a woman, He also gives her strength and
grace to execute it.

The nine hundred iron chariots of the Canaanites could not save them.
They fly! They fly--horse and horseman, chariot and charioteer, officers
and troops--in one wild and terrific overthrow. Sisera, their leader,
is so frightened in the conflict that he can not wait until his team
turns around. He leaps from the chariot and starts, full run, for the
mountains.

Then this epic of the text was composed to celebrate the grand womanly
triumph: “Awake, awake, Deborah; awake, awake!”


DORCAS.

Impressed as I am with the mosque at Joppa, the first I ever saw, and
stirred as I am with the fact that this harbor once floated the great
rafts of Lebanon cedar from which the Temple at Jerusalem was builded,
Solomon’s oxen drawing the logs through this very town on the way to
Jerusalem, nothing can make me forget that this Joppa was the birthplace
of the sewing society that has blessed the poor of all succeeding ages in
all lands.

The disasters to Joppa when Judas Maccabæus set it on fire and when
Napoleon had five hundred prisoners massacred in this neighborhood can
not make me forget that one of the most magnificent charities of the
centuries was started in this seaport by Dorcas--a woman who with her
needle embroidered her name ineffaceably into the beneficence of the
world.

I see her sitting in the village home. In the door way and around about
the building, and even in the room where she sits, are the pale faces of
the poor.

She listens to their plaint.

She pities their woe.

She makes garments for them, and she adjusts the manufactured articles to
suit the bent form of this invalid woman and to that cripple who comes
crawling upon his hands and knees. She gives a coat to this one and
sandals to that one. With the gifts she mingles prayers and tears and
Christian encouragement.

Then she goes out to be greeted on the street corners by those whom
she has blessed, and all through the way of her walk the cry is heard:
“Dorcas is coming!”

The sick look up gratefully in her face as she puts a hand on the burning
brow, and the lost and the abandoned start up with hope as they hear her
gentle voice, as though an angel had addressed them; and as she goes out
the lane, eyes half put out with sin think they see a halo of light about
her brow and a trail of glory in her pathway.

That night a half-paid shipwright climbs the hill and reaches home. There
he sees his little boy well clad, and he asks: “Where did these clothes
come from?” They tell him: “Dorcas has been here.”

In another place, a woman is trimming a lamp; Dorcas brought the oil.

In another place, a family that had not been at table for many a week are
gathered now, for Dorcas brought them bread.

But there is a sudden pause in that woman’s ministry. They say: “Where is
Dorcas? Why, we have not seen her for many a day. Where is Dorcas?”

Then one of these poor people goes up and knocks at the door, and finds
the mystery solved. All through the haunts of wretchedness the news comes:

“Dorcas is sick!”

No bulletin flashing from the palace gate, telling the stages of a king’s
disease, is more anxiously waited for than the news from this sick
benefactress. Alas for Joppa! There is weeping and wailing. That voice
which has uttered so many cheerful words is now hushed; that hand which
had made so many garments for the poor is cold and still; that star which
had poured light into the midnight of wretchedness is dimmed by the
blinding mists that go up from the river of death.

In every God-forsaken place in that town; wherever there is hunger and no
bread; wherever there is guilt and no commiseration; wherever there is a
broken heart and no comfort--there are despairing looks, streaming eyes
and frantic gesticulations as they cry:

“Dorcas is dead!”

They send for the apostle, Peter. He edges his way through the
crowd around the door, and stands in the presence of the dead. What
expostulation and grief all about him!

Here stand some of the poor people, who show the garments which this good
woman had made for them. Their grief can not be appeased.

Peter, the apostle, wants to perform a miracle. He will not perform
it amid the excited crowd, so he kindly orders that the whole room be
cleared. The door is shut against the populace.

The apostle stands now with the dead. Oh, it is a serious moment, you
know, when you are alone with a lifeless body! The apostle gets down
on his knees and prays, and then he comes to the lifeless form of this
one all ready for the sepulcher, and in the strength of Him who is the
resurrection he exclaims:

“Tabitha, arise!”

There is a stir in the fountains of life; the heart flutters; the nerves
thrill; the cheek flushes; the eye opens; she sits up!

We see in this subject Dorcas the disciple, Dorcas the benefactress,
Dorcas the lamented, Dorcas the resurrected.

If I had not seen that word disciple in my text, I yet would have known
this woman was a Christian. Such music as that never came from a heart
which is not both chorded and strung by Divine grace.

Before I show you the needle-work of this woman, I want to show you
her regenerated heart--the source of a pure life and of all Christian
charities.

I wish that the wives and mothers and daughters and sisters of this
congregation would imitate Dorcas in her discipleship. Before you sit
with the Sabbath class, before you cross the threshold of the hospital,
before you carry a pack of tracts down the street, before you enter upon
the temptations and trials of tomorrow, I charge you, in the name of God
and by the turmoil and tumult of the Judgment Day, O women, that you
attend to the first, last and greatest duty of your life--the seeking for
God and being at peace with Him.

Now, by the courtesies of society, you are deferred to, and he were far
less than a man who would not oblige you with kind attentions; but when
the trumpet shall sound, there will be an uproar, and a wreck of mountain
and continent, and no human arm can help you. Amidst the rising of the
dead, and amidst the boiling of the seat and amidst the live, leaping
thunders of the flying heavens, there will be no chance for these
courtesies.

But, on that day, calm and placid will be every woman’s heart who has
put her trust in Christ; calm, notwithstanding all the tumult, as though
the fire in the heavens were only the gildings of an autumnal sunset--as
though the peal of the trumpet were only the harmony of an orchestra--as
though the awful voices of the sky were but a group of friends bursting
through a gateway at eventime with laughter, and shouting: “Dorcas the
disciple!”

Would to God that every Mary and every Martha would this day sit down at
the feet of Jesus!

Further, we see Dorcas the benefactress.

History has told the story of the crown; the epic poet has sung of the
sword; the pastoral poet, with his verses full of the redolence of
clover-tops and arustle with the silk of the corn, has sung the praises
of the plow. I tell you the praises of the needle.

From the fig-leaf robe prepared in the Garden of Eden to the last
stitch taken last night on some garment for some church fair, the
needle has wrought wonders of kindness, generosity and benefaction. It
adorned the girdle of the high priest; it fashioned the curtains in
the ancient Tabernacle; it cushioned the chariots of King Solomon; it
provided the robes of Queen Elizabeth; and in high places and in low
places, by the fire of the pioneer’s back-log and under the flash of the
chandelier--everywhere, it has clothed nakedness, it has preached the
Gospel, it has overcome hosts of penury and want with the war-cry of:
“Stitch, stitch, stitch!” The operatives have found a livelihood by it,
and through it the mansions of the employers have been constructed.

Amidst the greatest triumphs in all ages and lands, I set down the
conquests of the needle.

I admit its crimes; I admit its cruelties. It has had more martyrs
than the fire; it has butchered more souls than the Inquisition; it
has punctured the eye; it has pierced the side; it has struck weakness
into the lungs; it has sent madness into the brain; it has filled the
potter’s field; it has pitched whole armies of the suffering into crime,
wretchedness and woe.

But, now that I am talking of Dorcas and her ministries to the poor, I
shall speak only of the charities of the needle.

This woman was a representative of all those women who make garments for
the destitute, who knit socks for the barefooted, who prepare bandages
for the lacerated, who fix up boxes of clothing for Western missionaries,
who go into the asylums of the suffering and destitute bearing that
Gospel which is sight for the blind and hearing for the deaf, and which
makes the lame man leap like a hart, and brings the dead to life with
immortal health bounding in their pulses.

What a contrast between the practical benevolence of this woman and a
great deal of the charity of this day!

Dorcas did not spend her time planning how the poor of Joppa were to be
relieved; she took her needle and relieved them. She was not like those
persons who sympathize with imaginary sorrows, and go out in the street
and laugh at the boy who has upset his basket of cold victuals; nor was
she like that charity which makes a rousing speech on the benevolent
platform, and goes out to kick the beggar from the step, crying: “Hush
your miserable howling!”

The sufferers of the world want not so much theory as practice; not so
much tears as dollars; not so much kind wishes as loaves of bread; not
so much smiles as shoes; not so much “God bless yous!” as jackets and
frocks. I will put one earnest Christian man, who is a hard worker,
against five thousand mere theorists on the subject of charity.

There are a great many who have fine ideas about church architecture who
never in their lives helped to build a church. There are men who can give
you the history of Buddhism and Mohammedanism who never sent a farthing
for the evangelization of the adherents of those religions.

There are women who talk beautifully about the suffering in the world who
never had the courage, like that of Dorcas, to take up the needle and
assault it.

I am glad that there is not a page of the world’s history which is not a
record of feminine benevolence. God says to all lands and peoples: “Come,
now, and hear the widow’s mite rattle down into the poor-box.”

The Princess of Conti sold all her jewels, that she might help the
famine-stricken. Queen Blanche, wife of Louis VIII. of France, hearing
that there were some persons unjustly incarcerated in the prisons, went
out and took a stick and struck the door, as a signal that all might
strike it; and down went the prison door, and out came the prisoners.
Queen Maud, the wife of Henry I., went down amidst the poor and
washed their sores, and administered to them cordials. Mrs. Retson, at
Matagorda, appeared on the battle field while the missiles of death were
flying around, and cared for the wounded.

But why go so far back? Why go so far away?

Is there a man or woman in this house who has forgotten the women of the
sanitary and Christian Commissions? Has any one forgotten that, before
the smoke had gone from Gettysburg and South Mountain, the women of the
North met the women of the South on the battle field, forgetting all
their animosities while they bound up the wounded and closed the eyes of
the slain? Have you forgotten Dorcas, the benefactress?

I come now to speak of Dorcas the lamented. When death struck down that
good woman, oh, how much sorrow there was in Joppa!

I suppose there were women living in Joppa possessing larger fortunes;
women, perhaps, with more handsome faces; but there was no grief at their
departure like this at the death of Dorcas. There was not more turmoil
and upturning in the Mediterranean Sea, dashing against the wharves of
that seaport, than there were surgings to and fro of grief in Joppa
because Dorcas was dead.

There are a great many who go out of life and are unmissed. There may be
a very large funeral; there may be a great many carriages and a plumed
hearse; there may be high-sounding eulogiums; the bell may toll at the
cemetery gate; there may be a very fine marble shaft reared over the
resting place. But the whole thing may be a falsehood and a sham.

By this demise the Church of God has lost nothing; the world has lost
nothing. It is only a nuisance abated; it is only a grumbler ceasing to
find fault; it is only an idler stopped yawning; it is only a dissipated
fashionable parted from his wine cellar--while, on the other hand, no
useful Christian leaves this world without being missed. The Church
of God cries out like the prophet: “Howl, fir tree, for the cedar has
fallen.” Widowhood comes and shows the garments which the departed had
made. Orphans are lifted up to look into the calm face of the sleeping
benefactress. Reclaimed vagrancy comes and kisses the cold brow of her
who charmed it away from sin, and all through the streets of Joppa there
is mourning--mourning because Dorcas is dead.

I suppose you have read of the fact that when Josephine was carried out
to her grave there were a great many men and women of pomp and pride and
position that went out after her; but I am most affected by the story of
history that on that day there were ten thousand of the poor of France
who followed her coffin, weeping and wailing until the air rang again,
because when they lost Josephine they lost their last earthly friend.

Oh, who would not rather have such obsequies than all the tears that were
ever poured in the lachrymals that have been exhumed from ancient cities!
There may be no mass for the dead; there may be no costly sarcophagus;
there may be no elaborate mausoleum. But in the damp cellars of the
city, and through the lonely huts of the mountain glen, there will be
mourning--mourning because Dorcas is dead.

I speak to you of Dorcas the resurrected. The apostle came to where she
was, and said: “Arise!” And “she sat up.” In what a short compass the
great writer put that: “She sat up!”

Oh, what a time there must have been when the apostle brought her out
among her old friends! How the tears of joy must have started! What
clapping of hands there must have been! What singing! What laughter!
Sound it all through that lane! Shout it down that dark alley! Let all
Joppa hear it! Dorcas is resurrected!

You and I have seen the same thing many a time--not a dead body
resuscitated, but the deceased coming up again after death in the good
accomplished. If a man labors up to fifty years of age, serving God, and
then dies, we are apt to think that his earthly work is done. No! His
influence on Earth will continue till the world ceases. Services rendered
for Christ never stop.

Here is a Christian woman. She toils for the upbuilding of a church
through many anxieties, through many self-denials, with prayers and
tears, and then she dies. It is fifteen years since she went away. Now
the Spirit of God descends upon that church; hundreds of souls stand up
and confess the faith of Christ.

Has that Christian woman, who went away fifteen years ago, nothing to do
with these things? I see the flowering out of her noble heart. I hear the
echo of her footsteps in all these songs over sins forgiven--in all the
prosperity of the church. The good that seemed to be buried has come up
again. Dorcas is resurrected.

After a while all these womanly friends of Christ will put down their
needles for ever. After making garments for others, some one will make a
garment for them; the last robe which we shall ever wear--the robe which
is for the grave.

You will have heard the last cry of pain. You will have witnessed the
last orphanage. You will have come in worn out from your last round of
mercy. I do not know where you will sleep, nor what your epitaph will
be; but there will be a lamp burning at that tomb and an angel of God
guarding it, and through all the long night no rude foot will disturb the
dust. Sleep on--sleep on! Soft bed, pleasant shadows, undisturbed repose!
Sleep on!


EHUD.

Ehud was a ruler in Israel. He was left-handed, and, what was peculiar
about the tribe of Benjamin, to which he belonged, there were in it seven
hundred left-handed men; and yet, so dextrous had they all become in the
use of the left hand, the Bible says they could sling stones at a hair’s
breadth and not miss.

Well, there was a king by the name of Eglon, who was an oppressor of
Israel. He imposed upon them an outrageous tax.

Ehud, the man of whom I first spoke, had a divine commission to destroy
that oppressor. He came, pretending that he was going to pay the tax, and
asked to see King Eglon. He was told the king was in the Summer house,
the place to which his majesty retired when the heat was too great to
sit in the palace. This Summer house was a place surrounded by flowers,
springing fountains and trees--the latter filled with warbling birds.

Ehud entered the Summer house, and said to King Eglon that he had a
secret errand with him. Immediately all the attendants were waved out of
the royal presence. King Eglon rises up to receive the messenger. Ehud,
the left-handed man, puts his left hand to his right side, pulls out a
dagger, and thrusts Eglon through until the haft went in after the blade.
Eglon falls.

Ehud comes forth to blow a trumpet of right amidst the mountains of
Ephraim; and a great host is marshaled, and proud Moab submits to the
conqueror, and Israel is free.

I learn first, from this subject, the power of left-handed men. There are
men who, by physical organization, have as much strength in their left
hand as in their right hand; but there is something in the writing of the
fifteenth verse of the third chapter of Judges that implies Ehud had some
defect in his right hand, which compelled him to use the left.

Oh, the power of left-handed men! Genius is often self-observant,
careful of itself, not given to much toil, burning incense to its own
aggrandizement; while many a man, with no natural endowments, actually
defective in physical and mental organization, has an earnestness for the
right, a patient industry, an all-consuming perseverance, which achieve
marvels for the kingdom of the Lord. Though left-handed as Ehud, they can
strike down a sin as imperial as Eglon.

But I do not suppose that Ehud, the first time he took a sling in his
left hand, could throw a stone a hair’s breadth, and not miss. I suppose
it was practice that gave him the wonderful dexterity.

Go forth to your spheres of duty, and do not be discouraged if, in your
first attempts, you miss the mark. Ehud missed it.


ESAU.

Esau had the birthright given him.

In the olden times this meant not only temporal but spiritual blessing.

One day Esau took this birthright and traded it off for something to eat.
Oh, the folly! But let us not be too severe upon him, for some of us have
committed the same folly.

After Esau had thus parted with his birthright, he wanted to get it back.
Just as though you, tomorrow morning, should take all your notes and
bonds and government securities, and should go into a restaurant, and
in a fit of restlessness and hunger throw all those securities on the
counter and ask for a plate of food, making that exchange.

This was the exchange Esau made.

He sold his birthright for a mess of pottage, and he was very sorry about
it afterward; but “he found no place for repentance, though he sought it
carefully with tears.”

There are sins which, though they may be pardoned, are in some respects
irrevocable; and you can find no place for repentance, though you seek it
carefully with tears. After wasting forty years, you can not get back the
neglected advantages of boyhood and youth.


FELIX AND DRUSILLA.

A city of marble was Cesarea--wharves of marble, houses of marble,
temples of marble. This being the ordinary architecture of the place, you
may well imagine something of the splendor of Governor Felix’s residence.

In a room of that palace--floor tesselated, windows curtained, ceiling
fretted, the whole scene affluent with Tyrian purple, and statues, and
pictures, and carvings--sat a very dark-complexioned man by the name of
Felix, and beside him sat a woman of extraordinary beauty, whom he had
stolen by breaking up another’s domestic circle.

She was only eighteen years of age, a princess by birth, and unwittingly
waiting for her doom--that of being buried alive in the ashes and scoria
of Mount Vesuvius, which in sudden eruption, one day, put an end to her
abominations.

Well, one afternoon Drusilla, seated in the palace, weary with the
magnificent stupidities of the place, says to Felix:

“You have a very distinguished prisoner, I believe, by the name of Paul.
Do you know he is one of my countrymen? I should very much like to see
him, and I should very much like to hear him speak, for I have heard so
much about his eloquence.

“Besides that, the other day, when he was being tried in another room of
this palace, and the windows were open, I heard the applause that greeted
the speech of Lawyer Tertullus, as he denounced Paul. Now, I very much
wish I could hear Paul speak. Won’t you let me hear him speak?”

“Yes,” said Felix, “I will. I will order him up now from the guard room.”

The clank of a chain is heard coming up the marble stairway, there is a
shuffle at the door, and in comes Paul--a little old man, prematurely old
through exposure--only sixty years of age, but looking as though he were
eighty.

Paul bows very courteously before Governor Felix and the beautiful woman
by his side. They say:

“Paul, we have heard a great deal about your speaking. Give us, now, a
specimen of your eloquence.”

Oh, if there ever was a chance for a man to show off, Paul had a chance
there!

He might have harangued them about Grecian art, about the wonderful
water-works which he had seen at Corinth, about the Acropolis by
moonlight, about prison life in Philippi, about “What I Saw in
Thessalonica,” or about the old mythologies.

But, instead, Paul said to himself: “I am now on the way to martyrdom,
and this man and woman will soon be dead; so this is my only opportunity
to talk to them about the things of eternity.”

And, just there and then, there broke in upon the scene a peal of
thunder. It was the voice of Judgment Day speaking through the words of
the decrepit apostle. As the grand old missionary proceeded with his
remarks, the stoop begins to go out of his shoulders, and he rises up,
and his countenance is illumined with the glories of a future life, and
his shackles rattle and grind as he lifts his fettered arm, and with it
hurls upon his abashed auditors the bolts of God’s indignation.

Felix grew very white about the lips. His heart beat unevenly. He put his
hand to his brow, as though to stop the quickness and violence of his
thoughts. He drew his robe tighter about him, as under a sudden chill.
His eyes glare and his knees shake, and, as he clutches the side of his
chair in a very paroxysm of terror, he orders the sheriff to take Paul
back to the guard room.

“Felix trembled, and said: ‘Go thy way for this time; when I have a
convenient season, I will call for thee.’”

I propose to give you two or three reasons why I think Felix sent Paul
back to the guard room and adjourned this whole subject of religion.

The first reason was: He was unwilling to give up his sins. He looked
around; there was Drusilla. He knew that, when he became a Christian, he
must send her back to Azizus, her lawful husband; and he said to himself:
“I will risk the destruction of my immortal soul sooner than I will do
that.”

Delilah sheared the locks of Samson; Salome danced Herod into the pit;
Drusilla blocked up the way to Heaven for Felix.

Another reason why Felix sent Paul back to the guard room and adjourned
this subject was: He was so very busy. In ordinary times he found the
affairs of state absorbing, but those were extraordinary times. The whole
land was ripe for insurrection. The Sicarii, a band of assassins, were
already prowling around the palace, and I suppose he thought: “I can not
attend to religion while I am so pressed by affairs of state.” It was
business, among other things, that ruined his soul.

Aye, with thousands of the present day, it is the annoyance of the
kitchen, and the sitting room and the parlor--the wearing economy of
trying to meet large expenses with a small income. Ten thousand voices of
“business” drown the voice of the Eternal Spirit.


GALLERY OF CHARACTERS.

I see the Gallery of the Prophets and Apostles.

Who are those mighty ones up yonder? Hosea, Jeremiah, Daniel, Isaiah,
Paul, Peter, John and James.

There sits Noah, waiting for all the world to come into the ark.

Moses is waiting till the last Red Sea shall divide.

Jeremiah is waiting for the Jews to return.

John of the Apocalypse is waiting for the swearing of the angel that Time
shall be no longer.

Glorious spirits! Ye were howled at; ye were stoned; ye were spit upon.
They have been in this fight themselves, and they are all with us. Daniel
knows all about lions. Paul fought with beasts at Ephesus. For Joseph, a
pit; for Daniel, a wild beast den; for David, dethronement and exile; for
John the Baptist, a wilderness diet and the executioner’s ax; for Peter,
a prison; for Paul, shipwreck; for John, desolate Patmos; for Vashti,
most insulting cruelty.

In that gallery, prophetic and apostolic, they can not keep their peace.
Daniel cries out: “Thy God will deliver thee from the mouth of the
lions!” David exclaims: “He will not suffer thy foot to be moved.” Isaiah
calls out: “Fear not! I am with thee. Be not dismayed.” Paul exclaims:
“Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ!”

I see the Angelic Gallery. There they are. There is the angel that swung
the sword at the gate of Eden, the same whom Ezekiel saw upholding
the throne of God, and from which I look away, for the splendor is
insufferable. Here are the guardian angels. That one watched a patriarch;
this one protected a child. That one has been pulling a soul out of
temptation. All these are messengers of light. Those drove the Spanish
Armada on the rocks. This turned Sennacherib’s living hosts into a heap
of one hundred and eighty-five thousand corpses. Those, yonder, chanted
the Christmas carol over Bethlehem, until the chant awoke the shepherds.
These, at Creation, stood in the balcony of Heaven, and serenaded the
new-born world wrapped in swaddling clothes of light.

And there, holier and mightier than all, is Michael, the archangel.
To command an earthly host gives dignity; but this one is leader of
the twenty thousand chariots of God, and of the ten thousand times ten
thousand angels.

I think God gives command to the archangel, and the archangel to the
seraphim, and the seraphim to the cherubim, until all the lower orders of
Heaven hear the command and go forth on the high behest.


GIDEON.

The seventh chapter of the Book of Judges contains a detailed report of
the strangest battle ever fought.

God had told Gideon to go down and thrash the Midianites, but his army
is too large; for the glory must be given to God, and not to man. And so
proclamation is made that all those of the troops who are cowardly, and
want to go home, may go; and twenty-two thousand of them scampered away,
leaving only ten thousand men.

But God says the army is too large yet; and so He orders these ten
thousand remaining to march down through a stream, and commands Gideon
to notice in what manner these men drink of the water as they pass
through it. If they get down on all-fours and drink, then they are to
be pronounced lazy and incompetent for the campaign; but if, in passing
through the stream, they scoop up the water in the palm of the hand and
drink, and pass on, they are to be the men selected for the battle.

Well, the ten thousand men march down into the stream, and the most of
them come down on all-fours, and plunge their mouths, like a horse or
an ox, into the water and drink; but there are three hundred men who,
instead of stooping, just dip the palm of their hands in the water and
bring it to their lips--“lapping as the dog lappeth.”

Those three hundred brisk, rapid and enthusiastic men are chosen for the
campaign. They are each to take a trumpet in the right hand and a pitcher
in the left hand, and a lamp inside the pitcher; and then at a given
signal they are to blow the trumpets, throw down the pitchers and hold up
the lamps. So it was done.

It is night. I see a great host of Midianites, sound asleep in the valley
of Jezreel.

Gideon comes up with his three hundred picked men, and when every thing
is ready the signal is given, and they blow the trumpets, throw down the
pitchers and hold up the lamps.

The great host of Midianites, waking out of a sound sleep, take the
crash of the crockery and the glare of the lamps for the coming on of an
overwhelming foe; and they run, and cut themselves to pieces, and most
horribly perish.

The lessons of this subject are very spirited and impressive. This
seemingly valueless lump of quartz has the pure gold in it. The smallest
dewdrop on the meadow at night has a star sleeping in its bosom, and the
most insignificant passage of Scripture has in it a shining truth. God’s
mint coins no small change.


HEZEKIAH.

Luxurious living is not healthy. The second generation of kings and
queens and of lords and princes is apt to be brainless and invalid.

The second crop of grass is almost always short.

Royal blood is generally scrofulous. You will not be surprised, then, to
hear that King Hezekiah had disorders which broke out in a carbuncle,
virulent and deathful. The Lord told him he must die.

But Hezekiah did not want to die. He turned his face to the wall, so that
his prayer would not be interrupted, and cried to God for his life.

God heard the prayer and answered it, saying: “Behold, I will heal thee.”
But there was human instrumentality to be employed.

This carbuncle needed a cataplasm. That is a tough word that we use to
show how much we know. If in the pulpit we always used words the people
understood, we never should have any reputation for learning.

Well, this carbuncle needed a cataplasm, which is a poultice. Your old
mother, who doctored her own children in the time when physicians were
not as plentiful as they are now, will tell you that the very best
poultice is a fig, and that was what was used upon the carbuncle of King
Hezekiah. The power of God, accompanied by this human instrumentality,
cured the king.

In this age of discovery, when men know so much it kills them, and write
so wisely it almost kills us, it has been found out that prayer to God is
a dead failure. All things are arranged according to inexorable law.

Ah, my friends, have we been so mistaken? Does God hear and answer
prayer, or does He not? Why come out with a challenge in this day, and an
experiment, when we have here the very experiment?

Hezekiah was sick unto death; he prayed for his life; God heard him, and
added fifteen years to that lifetime. The prayer saved him, the lump of
figs applied being merely the God-appointed human instrumentality.


JEHOIAKIM.

We look in upon a room in Jerusalem. Two men are there.

At the table sits Baruch, the scribe, with a roll of parchment and an
iron pen in his hand. The other man is walking the floor, as if strangely
agitated.

There is an unearthly appearance about his countenance, and his whole
frame quakes as if pressed upon by something unseen and supernal.

This is Jeremiah, in the spirit of prophecy. Being too much excited to
write with his own hands the words that the Almighty pours upon his mind
about the coming destruction of Jerusalem, he dictates to Baruch, the
scribe. It is a seething, scalding, burning denunciation of Jehoiakim,
the king, and a prophecy of approaching disasters.

Of course, King Jehoiakim hears of the occurrence, and he sends Jehudi to
obtain the parchment and read its contents.

It is winter. Jehoiakim is sitting in his comfortable winter house, by
a fire that glows upon the hearth and lights up the faces of the lords,
princes and senators who have gathered to hear the reading of the strange
document.

Silence is ordered. The royal circle bend forward to listen. Every eye is
fixed.

Jehudi unrolls the book gleaming with the words of God, and as he reads
Jehoiakim frowns; his eye kindles; his cheek burns; his foot comes down
with thundering indignation.

King Jehoiakim snatches the book from Jehudi’s hand, feels for his knife,
crumples up the book, and goes to work cutting it up with his penknife.
Thus God’s book was permanently destroyed, and the king escaped.

Was it destroyed?

Did Jehoiakim escape?

In a little while King Jehoiakim’s dead body is hurled forth to blacken
in the sun, and the only epitaph that he ever had was that which Jeremiah
wrote:

“Buried with the burial of an ass.”

To restore the book which was destroyed, Baruch again takes his seat at
the table, while Jeremiah walks the floor and again dictates the terrible
prophecy.

It would take more penknives than cutler ever sharpened to hew into
permanent destruction the Word of God. He who shoots at this eternal rock
will feel the bullet rebound into his own torn and lacerated bosom.

When the Almighty goes forth armed with the thunderbolts of His power, I
pity any Jehoiakim who attempts to fight Him with a penknife.

That Oriental scene has vanished, but it has often been repeated. There
are thousands of Jehoiakims yet alive who cut the Word of God with their
penknives.

King Jehoiakim showed as much indignity toward the scroll when he cut one
way as when he cut the other. You might as well behead Moses as to behead
Jonah. Yes, Sir, I shall take all of the Bible or none. Men laugh at us
as if we were the most gullible people in the world for believing in the
genuineness of the Scriptures; but there can be no doubt that the Bible,
as we have it, is the same--no more, no less--as God wrote it.

As to the books of the New Testament, the great writers of the different
centuries give complete catalogs of their contents. Polycarp, Ignatius
and Clemens Romanus, in the first century, give a catalog of the New
Testament books; Tertullian and Justin Martyr, in the second century;
Cyprian and Origen, in the third century; Augustine, Jerome and Eusebius,
in the fourth century. Their catalogs of the different books of the New
Testament silence the suggestion that any new books could have been
stealthily put in.

As to the books of the Old Testament, Christ sanctioned them by
recommending them to the Jews. If any part of the Old Testament had
been uninspired, Christ would have said: “Search the Scriptures--all
except that Book of Jonah,” or “Search the Scriptures, except the Book
of Esther.” When Christ commends to all the canon of the Old Testament
Scriptures, He affirms its genuineness.

There never could have been any interpolations in the Bible, for the Jews
were constantly watching, and there were men whose lifetime business it
was to attend to the keeping of the Scriptures unadulterated.


JEHU.

Joram, wounded in battle, lies in a hospital at Jezreel. The watchman,
standing in the tower, looks off and sees against the sky horsemen and
chariots.

A messenger is sent out to find who is coming, but he does not return.
Another messenger is sent, but with the same result.

The watchman, standing in the tower, looks off upon the advancing troop,
and gets more and more excited, wondering who are coming. But long before
the cavalcade comes up, the matter is decided.

The watchman can not descry the features of the fast approaching man, but
he exclaims:

“I have found out who he is. The driving is like the driving of Jehu, the
son of Nimshi; for he driveth furiously.”

By the flash of that one sentence we discover Jehu’s character. He came
with such speed not merely because he had an errand to do, but because
he was urged on by a headlong disposition, which had won him the name of
a reckless driver, even among the watchmen. The chariot plunges until
you almost expect the wheels to crash under it, or some of the princely
party to be thrown out, or the horses to become utterly unmanageable. But
he always goes so; and he becomes a type of that class of persons to be
found in all communities, who in worldly and in religious affairs may be
styled reckless drivers.

To this same class belong all those who conduct their worldly affairs
in a headlong way, without any regard to prudence or righteousness. The
minister of Christ does not do his whole duty who does not plainly and
unmistakably bring the Gospel face to face with every style of business
transaction. We have a right, in a Christian manner, to point out those
who, year by year, are jeopardizing not only their welfare, but the
interests of many others, by reckless driving.

As a hackman, having lost control of a flying span, is apt to crash
into other vehicles, until the property and lives of a whole street are
endangered, so a man driving his worldly calling with such loose reins
that, after a while, it will not answer his voice or hand, puts in peril
the commercial interests of scores or hundreds.

There are today in our midst many of our best citizens who have come down
from affluence into straitened circumstances, because there was a partner
in their firm, or a cashier in their bank, or an agent representing their
house, or one of their largest creditors, who, like Jehu, the son of
Nimshi, was a furious driver.

When I see in the community men with large incomes, but larger outgoes,
rushing into wildest undertakings, their pockets filled with circulars
about gold to be found in Canada and lead in Missouri and fortunes of
all sorts everywhere, launching out in expenditures to be met with the
thousands they expect to make, and with derision dashing across the path
of sober men depending upon their industry and honor for success, I say:
“Here he comes, the son of Nimshi, driving furiously.”

When I see a young man, not content gradually to come to a competency,
careless as to how often he goes upon credit, spending in one night’s
carousal a month’s salary, taking the few hundred dollars given him for
getting a start in the purchase of a regal wardrobe, lazy or ashamed to
work, anxious only for display, regardless of his father’s counsel and
the example of the thousands who, in a short while, have wrecked body,
mind and soul in scheming or dissipation, I say: “Here he comes, the son
of Nimshi, driving furiously.”

When this world gets full power over a man, he might as well be dead. He
is dead! When Sisera came into the house of Jael, she gave him something
to drink, and got him asleep on the floor. Then she took a peg from the
side of her tent, and with a mallet she drove the peg through the brain
of Sisera into the floor. So the world feeds and flatters a man, and when
it has him sound asleep it strikes his life out.


JESUS AT EMMAUS.

Two villagers, having concluded their errand in Jerusalem, have started
out at the city gate, and are on their way to Emmaus, the place of their
residence.

They go with a sad heart. Jesus, who had been their admiration and their
joy, had been basely massacred and entombed.

As with sad face and broken heart they pass on their way, a stranger
accosts them. They tell him their anxieties and bitterness of soul. He,
in turn, talks to them, mightily expounding the Scriptures. He throws
over them the fascination of intelligent conversation. They forget the
time, and notice not the objects they pass, and, before they are aware,
have come up in front of their house.

They pause before the entrance, and attempt to persuade the stranger
to tarry with them. They press upon him their hospitalities. Night is
coming on, and he may meet a prowling wild beast, or be obliged to lie
unsheltered from the dew. He can not go much farther now. Why not stop
there, and continue their pleasant conversation? They take him by the
arm, and they insist on his coming in, addressing him in the words:
“Abide with us; for it is toward evening.”

The candles are lighted. The tables are spread. Pleasant sociabilities
are enkindled. They rejoice in the presence of the stranger guest. He
asks a blessing upon the bread they eat, and he hands a piece of it to
each.

Suddenly, and with overwhelming power, the thought flashes upon the
astonished people: “He is the Lord!” And as they sat in breathless
wonder, looking upon the resurrected body of Jesus, He vanished. The
interview was ended. He was gone.

The journey from Jerusalem to Emmaus will soon be ended. Our Bible, our
common sense and our observation reiterate this fact in tones that we can
not mistake, and which we ought not to disregard.


JOB.

Job had it hard. What with boils and bereavements and bankruptcy, and a
fool of a wife, he wished he was dead; and I do not blame him.

His flesh was gone, and his bones were dry. His teeth wasted away until
nothing but the enamel seemed left. He cried out: “I am escaped with the
skin of my teeth.”

There has been some difference of opinion about this passage. St. Jerome
and Schultens and Doctors Good, Poole and Barnes have all tried their
forceps on Job’s teeth. You deny my interpretation, and ask: “What did
Job know about the enamel of the teeth?”

He knew every thing about it. Dental surgery is almost as old as the
Earth. The mummies of Egypt, thousands of years old, are found today with
gold filling in their teeth. Ovid, Horace, Solomon and Moses wrote about
these important factors of the body.

To other provoking complaints, I think Job had added an exasperating
toothache, and, putting his hand against the inflamed face, he said: “I
am escaped with the skin of my teeth.”

A very narrow escape, you say, for Job’s body and soul; but there are
thousands of men who make just as narrow escape for their soul. There was
a time when the partition between them and ruin was no thicker than a
tooth’s enamel; but, as Job finally escaped, so, thank God, have they.

Paul expresses the same idea by a different figure when he says that some
people are “saved as by fire.”

A vessel at sea is in flames. You go to the stern of the vessel. The
boats have shoved off. The flames advance; you can no longer endure the
heat on your face. You slide down on the side of the vessel, and hold on
with your fingers, until the forked tongue of the fire begins to lick
the back of your hand, and you feel that you must fall, when one of the
life-boats comes back, and the passengers say they think they have room
for one more. The boat swings under you--you drop into it--you are saved.

So some men are pursued by temptation until they are partially consumed,
but, after all, get off--“saved as by fire.”

But I like the figure of Job a little better than that of Paul. With
God’s help, some men do make narrow escape for their souls, and are saved
as “with the skin of their teeth.”


JONAH.

God told Jonah to go to Nineveh on an unpleasant errand. He would not go.
He thought to get away from his duty by putting to sea.

With pack under his arm, I find him on his way to Joppa, a seaport. He
goes down among the shipping, and says to the men lying around on the
docks: “Which of these vessels sails today?”

A sailor answers: “Yonder is a vessel going to Tarshish. I think, if you
hurry, you may get on board her.”

Jonah steps on board the rough craft, asks how much the fare is, and
pays it. Anchor is weighed, sails are hoisted, and the rigging begins to
rattle in the strong breeze of the Mediterranean.

Joppa is an exposed harbor, and it does not take long for a vessel to
get out on the broad sea. The sailors like what they call a “spanking
breeze,” and the plunge of the vessel from the crest of a tall wave is
exhilarating to those who are at home on the deep.

But the strong breeze becomes a gale--the gale a hurricane. The
affrighted passengers ask the captain if he ever saw any thing like this
before. He answers:

“Oh, yes. This is nothing.”

Mariners are slow to admit danger to landsmen.

But, after a while, “crash!” goes the mast, and the vessel pitches so far
“a-beam’s-end” that there is a fear she will not be righted. The captain
answers few questions, but orders the throwing out of boxes and bundles
and so much of the cargo as they can get at.

At last, the captain confesses there is but little hope, and he tells
the passengers they had better begin praying. It is seldom that a sea
captain is an Atheist. He knows there is a God, for he has seen Him at
every point of latitude and longitude between Sandy Hook and Queenstown.
Captain Moody, commanding the Cuba, of the Cunard line, at Sunday service
led the music and sang like a Methodist.

The captain of this Mediterranean craft, having set the passengers to
praying, goes around the vessel, examining it at every point. He descends
into the cabin to see whether, in the strong wrestling of the waves, the
vessel has sprung a leak, and he finds Jonah asleep.

Jonah had had a wearisome tramp, and had spent many sleepless nights
about questions of duty, and he is so sound asleep that all the thunder
of the storm and all the screaming of the passengers disturb him not.

The captain lays hold of him, and begins to shake him out of his
unconsciousness with the cry: “Don’t you see that we are all going to the
bottom? Wake up and go to praying, if you have any God to go to. What
meanest thou, O sleeper? Arise, call upon thy God--if so be that God
will think upon us--that we perish not.”

The remainder of the story I will not rehearse, for you know it well. To
appease the sea, they threw Jonah overboard.

The devil takes a man’s money, and then sets him down in a poor landing
place. The Bible says Jonah paid his fare to Tarshish. But see him get
out. The sailors bring him to the side of the ship, lift him over “the
guards,” and let him drop with a loud splash into the waves. He paid his
fare all the way to Tarshish, but he did not get the worth of his money.
Neither does any one who turns his back on his duty and does that which
is not right.

The worst sinner on shipboard, considering the light he had, was Jonah.
He was a member of the Church, while they were heathen. The sailors
were engaged in their lawful calling--following the sea. The merchants
on board, I suppose, were going down to Tarshish to barter. But Jonah,
notwithstanding his Christian profession, was flying from duty. He was
sound asleep in the cabin. Oh, how could the sinner sleep?

If Jonah had been told, one year before, that any heathen sea captain
would ever waken him to a sense of danger, he would have scoffed at the
idea; but here it is done. So now--men in strangest ways are aroused from
spiritual stupor.

If, instead of sleeping, Jonah had been on his knees confessing his sins
from the time when he went on board the craft, I think God would have
saved him from being thrown overboard. But he woke up too late. The
tempest is in full blast, the sea is lashing itself into convulsions,
and nothing will stop it now but the overthrow of Jonah. So Jonah was
cast overboard.


JOSEPH.

The Egyptian capital was the focus of the world’s wealth. In ships and
barges, there had been brought to it: From India, frankincense, cinnamon,
ivory and diamonds; from the North, marble and iron; from Syria, purple
and silk; from Greece, some of the finest horses of the world and some
of the most brilliant chariots; and from all the Earth, that which could
best please the eye, charm the ear and gratify the taste.

There were temples aflame with red sandstone, entered by gateways that
were guarded by pillars bewildering with hieroglyphics, wound with brazen
serpents and adorned with winged creatures--their eyes, beaks and pinions
glittering with precious stones.

There were marble columns blooming into white flower buds; there were
stone pillars, at the top bursting into the shape of the lotus when in
full bloom.

Along the avenues--lined with sphinx, fane and obelisk--there were
princes who came in gorgeously upholstered palanquin, carried by servants
in scarlet, or else were drawn by vehicles, the snow-white horses,
golden-bitted and six abreast, dashing at full run.

There were fountains from stone-wreathed vases climbing the ladders of
the light. You would hear a bolt shove, and a door of brass would open
like a flash of the sun. The surrounding gardens were saturated with
odors that mounted the terrace, dripped from the arbors and burned their
incense in the Egyptian noon.

On the floors of mosaic the glories of Pharaoh were spelled out in
letters of porphyry, beryl and flame. There were ornaments twisted from
the wood of the tamarisk, embossed with silver breaking into foam. There
were footstools made out of a single precious stone. There were beds
fashioned out of a crouched lion in bronze. There were chairs spotted
with the sleek hide of the leopard. There were sofas footed with the
claws of wild beasts, and armed with the beaks of birds.

As you stand on the level beach of the sea on a Summer day, and look each
way, there are miles of breakers, white with the ocean foam, dashing
shoreward; so it seemed as if the sea of the world’s pomp and wealth
in the Egyptian capital for miles and miles flung itself up into white
breakers of marble temple, mausoleum and obelisk.

This was the place where Joseph, the shepherd boy, was called to stand
next to Pharaoh in honor.

What a contrast between this scene and his humble starting--between this
scene and the pit into which his brothers threw him! Yet Joseph was not
forgetful of his early home; he was not ashamed of where he came from.

The bishop of Mentz, descended from a wheelwright, covered his house
with spokes, hammers and wheels; and the king of Sicily, in honor of
his father, who was a potter, refused to drink out of any thing but an
earthen vessel.

So Joseph was not ashamed of his early surroundings, or of his
old-time father, or of his brothers. When the latter came up from the
famine-stricken land to get corn from the Egyptian king’s corn crib,
Joseph, instead of chiding them for the way they had maltreated and
abused him, sent them back with wagons, which King Pharaoh furnished,
laden with corn; and old Jacob, the father, was brought back in the
very same wagons, that Joseph, the son, might see him and give him a
comfortable home all the rest of his days.

Well, I hear the wagons, the king’s wagons, rumbling down in front of the
palace. On the outside of the palace, to see the wagons depart, stands
Pharaoh in royal robes; and beside him stands Prime Minister Joseph,
with a chain of gold around his neck, and on his hand a ring given by
Pharaoh to him, so that any time he wanted to stamp the royal seal upon a
document he could do so conveniently.

Wagon after wagon rolls on down from the palace, laden with corn, meat,
changes of raiment and every thing that could aid a famine-stricken
people.

I see aged Jacob, one day, seated in the front of his house. He is
probably thinking of his absent boys (for sons, however old they get, are
never to a father any more than boys); and while he is seated there, he
sees dust arising, and he hears wagons rumbling, and he wonders what is
coming now, for the whole land had been smitten with the famine, and was
in silence.

But after a while the wagons have come near enough, and he sees his sons
on the wagons, and before they come quite up, they shout:

“Joseph is yet alive!”

The old man faints dead away. I do not wonder at it. The boys now tell
the story how that the boy, the long-absent Joseph, has got to be the
first man in the Egyptian palace.

While they unload the wagons, the wan and wasted creatures in the
neighborhood come up and ask for a handful of corn, and they are
satisfied.

One day the wagons are brought up, for Jacob, the old father, is about to
go to see Joseph in the Egyptian palace.

You know, it is not a very easy thing to transplant an old tree; and
Jacob has hard work to get away from the place where he has lived so
long. He finally bids good-by to the old place, and leaves his blessing
with the neighbors; and then his sons steady him, while he, still
determined to help himself, gets into the wagon--stiff, old and decrepit.

Yonder they go--Jacob and his sons, his sons’ wives and their children,
eighty-two in all--followed by herds and flocks, which the herdsmen drive
along. They are going out from famine to luxuriance; they are going from
a plain country home to the finest palace under the sun. Joseph, the
prime minister, gets into his chariot and is driven down to meet the
old man. Joseph’s charioteer holds up the horses on the one side; the
dust-covered wagons of the emigrants stop on the other.

Joseph, instead of waiting for his father to come, leaps out of the
chariot and jumps into the emigrants’ wagon, throws his arms around the
old man, and weeps aloud for past memories and present joy.

The father, Jacob, can hardly think it is his boy. Why, the smooth brow
of childhood has now become a wrinkled brow--wrinkled with the cares
of state--and the garb of the shepherd boy has become a robe royally
bedizened!

But as the old man finally realizes that it is actually Joseph, I see the
thin lip quiver against the toothless gum, as he cries out: “Now let me
die, since I have seen thy face; behold, Joseph is yet alive!”


LAZARUS.

We stand in one of the finest private houses of the olden time. Every
room is luxurious. The floor--made of stones, gypsum, coal and chalk,
pounded together--is hard and beautiful. From the roof, surrounded by a
balustrade, you take in all the beauty of the landscape.

The porch is cool and refreshing, where sit the people who have come in
to look at the building, and are waiting for the usher. In this place you
hear the crystal plash of the fountains.

The windows, reaching to the floor and adorned, are quiet places to
lounge in; and we sit here, listening to the stamp of the horses in the
princely stables.

Venison and partridge, delicate morsels of fatted calf, and honey, figs,
dates, pomegranates and fish that only two hours ago glided in the
lake, and bowls of fine sherbet from Egypt--these make up the feast,
accompanied with riddles and jests that evoke roaring laughter, with
occasional outbursts of music, in which harps thrum and cymbals clap and
shepherd’s pipe whistles.

What a place to sit in!

The lord of the place, in dress that changes with every whim, lies on a
lounge, stupid from stuffed digestion. His linen is so fine, I wonder who
washed it and who ironed it. His jewels are the brightest, his purple the
rarest.

Let him lie perfectly quiet a moment, until we take his photograph. Here
we have it:

“A certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and
fared sumptuously every day.”

How accurate the picture! You can see every pleat in the linen and every
wrinkle in the shirt. What more could that man have? My lord, be happy!

After a while he leans over the balustrade, and says to a friend in
shining apparel:

“Look at that fellow--lying at my gate! I wonder why the porter allows
him to lie there. How disgusting! But our dogs will be let out of the
kennel very soon, and will clear him out.”

Yes, they bound toward him. “Take hold of him!” cries the rich man from
the balustrade.

The dogs go at the beggar with terrible bark; then take lower growling;
then stop to yawn; and at the coaxing tone of the poor wretch, they frisk
about him, and put their soft, healing tongues to his ulcers, driving off
the flies and relieving the insufferable itch and sting of wounds which
could not afford salve or bandage.

Lazarus has friends at last. They will for a while keep off the insults
of the street, and will defend their patient. That man is far from
friendless who has a good dog to stand by him. Dogs are often not so mean
as are their masters. They will not be allowed to enter into Heaven, but
may they not be allowed to lie down at the gate? John says of the door of
Heaven: “Without are dogs.”

But what is the matter with that beggar? He lies over, now, with his face
exposed to the sun. Lazarus, get up! He responds not. Poor fellow, he is
dead!

Two men appointed by the town come to carry him out to the fields. They
dig a hole, drop him in and cover him up. People say: “One more nuisance
got rid of.”

Aha! That is not Lazarus whom they buried; they buried only his sores.
Yonder goes Lazarus--an angel on his right hand, an angel on his left,
carrying him up the steep of Heaven--talking, praising, rejoicing. Good
old Abraham stands at the gate, and throws his arms around the new comer.

Now Lazarus has his own fine house, and his own robes, and his own
banquet, and his own chariot; and that poor and sickly carcass of his,
that the overseers of the town dumped in the potter’s field, will come
up at the call of the archangel--straight, pure and healthy--corruption
having become incorruption.

Now, we will go back a minute to the fine Oriental house that we spoke
of. The lord of the place has been receiving visitors today, as the
doorkeeper introduced them.

After a while there is a visitor who waits not for the porter to open
the gate, nor for the doorkeeper to introduce him. Who is it coming? Stop
him there at the door! How dare he come in unheralded?

He walks into the room, and the lord cries out, with terror-stricken face:

“This is Death! Away with him!”

There is a hard thump on the floor. Is it a pitcher that has fallen? An
ottoman upset? No. Dives has fallen. Dives is dead.

The excitement in town is great. The grooms rush from the barns to see.
All the great folk of the neighborhood, who used to sit at his dinners,
come in. The grocer from whom he got his spices, the butcher from whom he
got his meats and the clothier from whom he got his garments come to find
out all about it.

The day of burial has arrived. Dives is carried down out of his splendid
room, and through the porch into the street. The undertaker will
make a big job of it, for there is plenty to pay. There will be high
eulogies of him pronounced, although the Bible represents him as chiefly
distinguished for his enormous appetite and his fine shirt.

The long procession moves on, amid the accustomed weeping and howling
of Oriental obsequies. The sepulcher is reached. Six persons, carrying
the body, go carefully down the steps leading to the door of the dead.
The weight of the body on those ahead is heavy, and they hold back. The
relics are left in the sepulcher, and the people return.

But Dives is not buried there.

That which they buried is only the shell in which he lived. Dives is
down yonder in a deeper grave. He who had all the wine he could drink
asks for a plainer beverage. He wants water. He does not ask for a
cupful, nor even for a teaspoonful, but “just one drop,” and he can not
get it.

He looks up and sees Lazarus, the very man whom he set his dogs on, and
wants him to put his finger into water and let him lick it off.

Once Lazarus wanted just the crumbs from Dives’ feast; now Dives wants
just a drop from Lazarus’ banquet. Poor as poor can be! He has eaten his
last quail’s wing. He has broken the rind of his last pomegranate. Dives
the lord has become Dives the pauper. The dogs of remorse and despair
come not with healing tongue to lick, but with relentless muzzle to tear.
Now Dives sits at the gate in everlasting beggary, while Lazarus, amid
the festivities of Heaven, fares sumptuously every day.

You see that this parable takes in the distant future, and speaks as
though the resurrection were passed and the body of Lazarus had already
joined his spirit, and so I treat it.

Well, you see a man may be beggared for this life, but be a prince
in eternity. A cluster of old rags was the entire property of
Lazarus. His bare feet and his ulcered legs were an invitation to
the brutes; his food the broken victuals that were pitched out by
the house-keeper--half-chewed crusts, rinds, peelings, bones and
gristle--about the last creature out of which to make a prince--yet for
eighteen hundred years he has been one of the millionaires of Heaven. No
more waiting for crumbs. He sits at the same table with the kings of
eternity, himself one of them. What were the forty years of his poverty
compared with the long ages of his royalty?

Let all the Christian poor be comforted. Your good days will be after a
while. Stand it a little longer, and you will be all right. God has a
place for you among the principalities. Do not be afraid of the dogs of
distress, for they will not bite; they will help to heal. Your poverty
may sometimes have led you to doubt whether you will have a decent
funeral. You shall have grander obsequies than many a man who is carried
out by a procession of governors and senators. The pall-bearers will be
the angels that carried Lazarus into Abraham’s bosom. The surveyors have
been busy. Your eternal possessions have been already laid out by God’s
surveyors, and the stake that bounds the property on this side is driven
into the top of your grave, and all beyond is yours.

You can afford to wear poor clothes now, when for you in the upper
wardrobes is folded up the royal purple. You can afford to have coarse
food here, when your bread is to be made from the finest wheat of the
eternal harvests. Cheer up! Weeping may endure for a night, but joy
cometh in the morning.

See, also, that a man may have every comfort and luxury here, and yet
come to a wretched future. It is no sin to be rich. It is a sin not to
be rich, if we can be rich honestly. I wish I had five hundred thousand
dollars--I suppose I might as well make it a million. I see so much
suffering and trial every day that I say, again and again, I wish I had
the money to relieve it.

But alas for the man who has nothing but money! Dives’ house had a front
door and a back door, and they both opened into eternity. Sixty seconds
after Dives was gone, of what use were his horses? He could not ride
them. Of what use were his rich viands? He could not open his clenched
teeth to eat them. Of what use were his fine linen shirts, when he could
not wear them?

The poorest man who stood along the road, watching the funeral procession
of Dives, owned more of this world than did the dead gormandizer. The
future world was all the darker because of the brightness of this.

That wife of a drunken husband, if she does wrong and loses her soul,
will not find it so intolerable in hell as others, for she has been in
hell ever since she was married, and is partially used to it.

But this rich man, Dives, had every thing once--now nothing. He once had
the best wine; now he can not get water. He had, like other affluent
persons of the East, slaves to fan him when he was hot; now he is being
consumed. He can afford no covering so good as the old patches that once
fluttered about Lazarus as he went walking in the wind.

Who among my hearers will take Dives’ fine house, costly plate, dazzling
equipage and kennel of blooded dogs, if his eternity must be thrown in
with it?


NOAH.

Noah did the best and the worst thing for the world. He built an ark
against the deluge of water, but he also introduced a deluge against
which the human race has ever since been trying to build an ark--the
deluge of drunkenness.

In the opening chapters of the Bible we can hear his staggering steps.

Shem and Japhet tried to cover up the disgrace, but there is Noah--drunk
on wine at a time in the history of the world when, to say the least,
there was no lack of water.

Inebriation, having flooded the world, has never receded.

Abigail, the fair and heroic wife who saved the flocks of Nabal, her
husband, from confiscation by invaders, goes home at night and finds him
so intoxicated she can not tell him the story of his narrow escape.

Uriah came to see David, and David got him drunk, and paved the way for
the despoliation of his household.

Even the church bishops needed to be charged to be sober and not given to
too much wine; and so familiar were the people of Bible times with the
staggering and falling motions of the inebriate, that Isaiah, when he
comes to describe the final dislocation of worlds, says: “The Earth shall
reel to and fro like a drunkard.”


OTHNIEL.

The city of Debir was the Boston of antiquity--a great place for brains
and books.

Caleb wanted it, and he offered his daughter Achsah as a prize to any
one who would besiege or storm and capture that city.

It was a strange thing for Caleb to do; and yet the man who could take
the city would have, at any rate, two elements of manhood--bravery and
patriotism.

Besides, I do not think that Caleb was as foolish in offering his
daughter to the conqueror of Debir as thousands in this day who seek
alliances for their children with those who have large means, without any
reference to moral or mental acquirements.

Of the two evils, I would rather measure happiness by the length of the
sword than by the length of the pocket-book. In one case there is sure to
be one good element of character; in the other, there may be none at all.

With Caleb’s daughter as a prize to fight for, General Othniel rode into
the battle. The gates of Debir were thundered into the dust, and the city
of books lay at the feet of the conquerors.

The work done, Othniel comes back to claim his bride. Having conquered
the city, it is no great job for him to conquer the girl’s heart; for,
however faint-hearted a woman herself may be, she always loves courage in
a man. I never saw an exception to that.

The wedding festivity having gone by, Othniel and Achsah are about to go
to their new home. However loudly the cymbals may clash and the laughter
ring, the parents are always sad when a fondly cherished daughter goes
away to stay; and Achsah, the daughter of Caleb, knows that now is the
time to ask almost any thing she wants of her father.

It seems that Caleb, the good old man, had given as a wedding present to
his daughter a piece of land that was mountainous, and, sloping southward
toward the deserts of Arabia, it was swept by some very hot winds. It was
called “a south land.”

But Achsah wants an addition of property; she desires a piece of land
that is well watered and fertile.

Now, it is no wonder that Caleb, standing amid the bridal party, his eyes
so full of tears because his daughter was going away that he could hardly
see her at all, gives her more than she asks. She said to him: “Thou hast
given me a south land; give me also springs of water.” And he gave her
the upper springs and the nether springs.

That passage occurs in the fifteenth chapter of the Book of Joshua,
nineteenth verse, but I never saw it till a little while ago; and as I
came upon it I said: “If God will give me grace, I shall preach a sermon
on that before long.”

The fact is that, as Caleb, the father, gave Achsah, the daughter, a
south land, so God gives to us His world. I am very thankful that He has
given it to us.

But I am like Achsah in the fact that I am not satisfied with the
portion. Trees, flowers, grasses and blue skies are very well in their
places; but he who has naught except this world for a portion has no
portion at all. It is a mountainous land, sloping off toward the desert
of sorrow, swept by fiery siroccos. It is “a south land”--a poor portion
for any man who tries to put trust in it.


PAUL.

The Damascus of Bible times still stands, with a population of 135,000
people. It was a gay city of white and glistering architecture, its
minarets and crescents and domes playing with the light of the morning
sun; embowered in groves of olive, citron, orange and pomegranate; a
famous river plunging its brightness into the scene--a city by the
ancients styled “a pearl surrounded by emeralds.”

A group of horsemen are advancing upon that city. Let the Christians of
the place hide, for that cavalcade coming over the hills is made up of
persecutors.

Their leader is small of stature and unattractive in some respects,
as leaders sometimes are insignificant in person--witness the Duke of
Wellington and Dr. Archibald Alexander. But there is something very
intent in the eye of the man at the head of this troop, and the horse
he rides is lathered with the foam of a long and a quick travel of 135
miles. He cries “Go ’long” to his steed, for those Christians must be
captured and must be silenced, and that religion of the cross must be
annihilated.

Suddenly the horses shy off, and plunge until their riders are
precipitated. Freed from their riders, the horses bound snorting away.

You know that dumb animals, at the sight of an eclipse or an earthquake,
or any thing like a supernatural appearance, sometimes become very
uncontrollable.

A new sun had been kindled in the heavens, putting out the glare of the
ordinary sun. Christ, with the glories of Heaven wrapped about Him,
looked out from a cloud and the splendor was insufferable, and no wonder
the horses sprang and the equestrians dropped.

Dust-covered and bruised, Saul attempts to get up, shading his eyes with
his hand from the severe luster of the heavens, but unsuccessfully, for
he is struck stone blind as he cries out: “Who art Thou, Lord?”

Jesus answered him:

“I am the One you have been chasing. He that whips and scourges those
Damascine Christians whips and scourges Me. It is not their back that is
bleeding; it is Mine. It is not their heart that is breaking; it is Mine.
I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest.”

From that wild, exciting and overwhelming scene there rises up the
greatest preacher of all ages--Paul; in whose behalf prisons were rocked
down, before whom soldiers turned pale, into whose hand Mediterranean sea
captains put control of their shipwrecking craft, and whose epistles are
the advance courier of the Resurrection Day.

I learn, first, from this scene that a worldly fall may precede a
spiritual uplifting. A man does not get much sympathy by falling off a
horse. People say he ought not to have got into the saddle if he could
not ride. Those of us who were brought up in the country remember well
how the workmen laughed when, on our way back from the brook, we suddenly
lost our ride. At the close of the great Civil War, when the army passed
in review at Washington, if a general had toppled from the stirrups it
would have been a national merriment.

Here is Paul on horseback--a proud man, riding on with government
documents in his pocket, a graduate of a most famous school in which the
celebrated Dr. Gamaliel had been a professor, perhaps having already
attained two of the three titles of the school: Rab, the first; Rabbi,
the second; and was on his way to Rabbak, the third and highest title.

I know from Paul’s temperament that his horse was ahead of the other
horses. But without time to think of what posture he should take, or
without any consideration for his dignity, he is tumbled into the dust.
And yet that was the best ride Paul ever took. Out of that violent fall
he arose into the apostleship. So it has been in all the ages, and so it
is now.

You will never be worth any thing for God and the Church until you lose
fifty thousand dollars, or have your reputation upset, or in some way,
somehow, are thrown and humiliated. You must go down before you go up.

Joseph finds his path to the Egyptian court through the pit into which
his brothers threw him.

Daniel would never have walked amid the bronze lions that adorned the
Babylonish throne if he had not first walked amid the real lions of the
cave.

Paul marshals all the generations of Christendom by falling flat on his
face on the road to Damascus.

Men who have been always prosperous may be efficient servants of the
world, but will be of no advantage to Christ. You may ride majestically
seated on your charger, rein in hand, foot in stirrup, but you will never
be worth any thing spiritually until you fall off. They who graduate from
the School of Christ with the highest honors have on their diploma the
seal of a lion’s muddy paw, or the plash of an angry wave, or the drop
of a stray tear, or the brown scorch of a persecuting fire.

In nine hundred and ninety-nine cases out of the thousand there is no
moral or spiritual elevation until there has been a thorough worldly
upsetting.

Again, I learn from the subject that the religion of Christ is not a
pusillanimous thing. People of this day try to make us believe that
Christianity is something for men of small caliber, for women with no
capacity to reason, for children in the infant class, under six years of
age, but not for stalwart men.

Look at this man who is mentioned in the ninth chapter of the Acts of the
Apostles. Do you not think that the religion that could capture such a
man as that must have some power in it?

Paul was a logician; he was a metaphysician; he was an all-conquering
orator; he was a poet of the highest type. He had a nature that could
swamp the leading men of his own day, and, hurled against the Sanhedrim,
he made it tremble.

Paul learned all he could get in the school of his immediate vicinity;
then he went to a higher school, and there mastered the Greek and the
Hebrew, and also perfected himself in belles-lettres, until in after
years he astonished the Cretans, the Corinthians and the Athenians by
quotations from their own authors.

I have never found any thing in Carlyle or Goethe or Herbert Spencer
that could compare in strength or in beauty with Paul’s Epistles. I do
not think there is any thing in the writings of Sir William Hamilton
that shows such mental discipline as you find in Paul’s argument about
justification and the resurrection. I have not found any thing in Milton
finer in the way of imagination than I can find in Paul’s illustrations
drawn from the amphitheater.

There was nothing in Robert Emmet pleading for his life, or in Edmund
Burke arraigning Warren Hastings in Westminster Hall, that compared with
the scene in the court room when, before robed officials, Paul bowed and
began his speech, saying: “I think myself happy, King Agrippa, because I
shall answer for myself this day.”

I repeat the assertion that a religion that can capture such a man as
that must have some power in it. It is time people stopped talking as
though all the brains of the world were opposed to Christianity. Where
Paul leads we can afford to follow.

I am glad to know that Christ has in the different ages of the world
had in His discipleship a Mozart and a Handel in music; a Raphael and a
Reynolds in painting; an Angelo and a Canova in sculpture; a Rush and
a Harvey in medicine; a Grotius and a Washington in statesmanship; a
Blackstone, a Marshall and a Kent in law.

The time will come when the religion of Christ will conquer all the
observatories and universities, and then, through her telescope
Philosophy will behold the morning star of Jesus, and in her laboratory
see that “all things work together for good,” and with her geological
hammer discover the “Rock of Ages.”

Instead of cowering and shivering when the skeptic stands before you and
talks of religion as though it were a pusillanimous thing, take your New
Testament from your pocket and show him the picture of the intellectual
giant of all the ages, prostrated on the road to Damascus, while his
horse is flying wildly away. Then ask the skeptic what it was that
frightened the one and threw the other.

Oh, no! It is no weak Gospel. It is a most glorious Gospel. It is an
all-conquering Gospel. It is an omnipotent Gospel. It is the power of God
and the wisdom of God unto salvation.

Jesus and Paul were boys at the same time in different villages, and
Paul’s antipathy to Christ was increasing. He hated every thing about
Christ. He was going down then with writs in his pockets to have Christ’s
disciples arrested. He was not going as a sheriff goes--to arrest a
man against whom he has no spite--but Paul was going down to arrest
those people because he was glad to arrest them. The Bible says: “He
breathed out slaughter.” He wanted them captured, and he also wanted them
butchered.

It was particularly outrageous that Saul should have gone to Damascus on
that errand. Jesus Christ had been dead only three years, and the story
of His kindness, generosity and love filled all the air. It was not an
old story, as it is now. It was a new story. Jesus had only three Summers
ago been in these very places, and Saul every day in Jerusalem must have
met people who knew Christ, people with good eyesight whom Jesus had
cured of blindness, people who were dead and had been resurrected by
the Savior, and people who could tell Paul all the particulars of the
crucifixion--just how Jesus looked to the last hour--just how the heavens
grew black in the face at the torture. He heard that recited every day
by people who were acquainted with all the circumstances, and yet in the
fresh memory of that scene he goes out to persecute Christ’s disciples,
impatient at the time it takes to feed the horses at the inn, not pulling
at the snaffle, but riding with loose rein--faster and faster.

Truly, Paul was the chief of sinners. No outbreak of modesty when he said
that. He was a murderer. He stood by when Stephen died, and helped in
the execution of that good man. When the rabble wanted to be unimpeded
in their work of destroying Stephen, and wanted to take off their coats
but did not dare to lay them down lest they be stolen, Paul said: “I will
take care of the coats.” So they put their coats down at the feet of
Paul, and he watched them, and he watched the horrid mangling of glorious
Stephen.

Is it not a wonder that when Paul fell from the horse he did not break
his neck--that his foot did not catch somewhere in the trappings of
the saddle, and he was not dragged and kicked to death? He deserved
to die--miserably, wretchedly and for ever--notwithstanding all his
metaphysics, eloquence and logic.

It seems to me as if I can see Paul today, rising up from the highway to
Damascus, brushing off the dust from his cloak and wiping the sweat of
excitement from his brow, as he turns to us and all the ages, saying:

“This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief.”

If it had been a mere optical illusion on the road to Damascus, was
not Paul just the man to find it out? If it had been a sham and
pretense, would he not have pricked the bubble? He was a man of facts
and arguments, of the most gigantic intellectual nature, and not a man
of hallucinations; and when I see him fall from the saddle, blinded and
overwhelmed, I say there must have been something in it.

I have been reading this morning, in my New Testament, of a Mediterranean
voyage in an Alexandrian ship. It was in the month of November.

On board that vessel were two distinguished passengers--one, Josephus,
the historian, as we have strong reasons to believe; the other, a
convict, one Paul by name, who was going to prison for upsetting
things--or, as they termed it, “turning the world upside down.”

This convict had gained the confidence of the captain. Indeed, I think
that Paul knew almost as much about the sea as did the captain. He had
been shipwrecked three times already, and had dwelt much of his life amid
capstans, yardarms, cables and storms, and he knew what he was talking
about.

Seeing the equinoctial storm was coming, and perhaps noticing something
unseaworthy in the vessel, he advised the captain to stay in the harbor.
But I heard the captain and the first mate talking together. They say, in
effect:

“We can not afford to take the advice of this landsman, and he a
minister. He may be able to preach very well, but I do not believe he
knows a marlinespike from a luff tackle. All aboard! Cast off! Shift the
helm for headway. Who fears the Mediterranean?”

They had gone only a little way out when a whirlwind, called Euroclydon,
made the torn sail its turban, shook the mast as you would brandish a
spear, and tossed the hulk into the heavens. Overboard with the cargo! It
is all washed with salt water and worthless now, and there are no marine
insurance companies. All hands, ahoy, and out with the anchors!

Great consternation comes on crew and passengers. The sea monsters snort
in the foam, and the billows clap their hands in glee of destruction.
In the lull of the storm I hear a chain clank. It is the chain of the
great apostle as he walks the deck or holds fast to the rigging amid the
lurching of the ship. The spray drips from his long beard as Paul cries
out to the crew, in tones of confidence:

“Now, I exhort you to be of good cheer, for there shall be no loss of any
man’s life among you, but of the ship. For there stood by me this night
the angel of God--whose I am and whom I serve--saying: ‘Fear not, Paul.
Thou must be brought before Cæsar; and lo, God hath given thee all them
that sail with thee.’”

Fourteen days have passed, and there is no abatement of the storm. It is
midnight. Standing on the lookout, the man peers into the darkness, and,
by a flash of lightning, sees the long white line of breakers, and knows
they must be coming near to some country, and fears that in a few moments
the vessel will be shivered on the rocks.

The ship flies like chaff in the tornado. They drop the sounding line,
and by the light of the lantern they see it is twenty fathoms. Speeding
along a little farther, they drop the line again, and by the light of
the lantern they see it is fifteen fathoms. Two hundred and seventy-six
souls within a few feet of awful shipwreck!

The managers of the vessel, pretending they want to look over the side of
the ship and undergird it, get into the small boat, expecting in it to
escape; but Paul sees through the sham, and he tells them that if they go
off in the boat it will be the death of them.

The vessel strikes! The planks spring! The timbers crack! The vessel
parts in the thundering surge! Oh, what struggling for life! Here they
leap from plank to plank. There they go under as if they would never
rise, but, catching hold of a timber, they come floating and panting on
it to the beach.

Here strong swimmers spread their arms through the waves until their
chins plow the sand, and they rise up, and ring out their wet locks
on the beach. When the roll of the ship is called, two hundred and
seventy-six people answer to their names.

Paul was the most illustrious merely human being the world has ever
known. He walked the streets of Athens and preached from yonder pile of
rocks, Mars Hill.

Though more classic associations are connected with Athens than with
any other city under the sun--because here Socrates, Plato, Aristotle,
Demosthenes, Pericles, Herodotus, Pythagoras, Xenophon and Praxiteles
wrote, chiseled, taught, thundered or sung--yet, in my mind, all those
men and their teachings were eclipsed by Paul and the Gospel he preached
there and in the near-by city of Corinth. Standing yesterday on the old
fortress at Corinth, the Acro-Corinthus, out from the ruin at its base
arose in my imagination the old city--just as Paul saw it.

I have been told that, for splendor, the world beholds no such wonder
today as that ancient Corinth, standing on an isthmus washed by two
seas--the one sea bringing the commerce of Europe, the other sea bringing
the commerce of Asia.

From her wharves, in the construction of which entire kingdoms had been
absorbed, war galleys with three banks of oars pushed out and confounded
the navy yards of all the world.

Huge handed machinery, such as modern invention can not equal, lifted
ships from the sea on one side and transported them on trucks across the
isthmus and sat them down in the sea on the other side.

The revenue officers of the city went down through the olive groves that
lined the beach to collect a tariff from all nations. The youth of all
peoples sported in her isthmian games and the beauty of all lands sat
in her theaters, walked her porticos and threw itself upon the altar of
her stupendous dissipations. Column, statue and temple bewildered the
beholder. There were white marble fountains into which, from apertures
at the side, there gushed waters everywhere known for health-giving
qualities. Around these basins, twisted into wreaths of stone, there
were all the beauties of sculpture and architecture; while standing, as
if to guard the costly display, was a statue of Hercules of burnished
Corinthian brass. Vases of terra cotta adorned the cemeteries of the
dead--vases so costly that Julius Cæsar was not satisfied till he had
captured them for Rome. Armed officials paced up and down to see that no
statue was defaced, pedestal overthrown or bas-relief touched.

From the edge of the city the hill held its magnificent burden of columns
and towers and temples (one thousand slaves waiting at one shrine), and
a citadel so thoroughly impregnable that Gibraltar is a heap of sand
compared with it. Amid all that strength and magnificence Corinth stood
and defied the world.

Oh, it was not to rustics who had never seen any thing grand that Paul
preached in Corinth. They had heard the best music that had come from the
best instruments in all the world; they had heard songs floating from
morning porticos and melting in evening groves; they had passed their
whole lives among pictures and sculpture and architecture and Corinthian
brass, which had been molded and shaped until there was no chariot wheel
in which it had not sped, and no tower in which it had not glittered, and
no gateway that it had not helped to adorn.

Ah, it was a bold act for Paul to stand there amid all that and say:

“All this is nothing. These sounds that come from the Temple of Neptune
are not music, compared with the harmonies of which I speak. These waters
rushing in the basin of Pyrene are not pure. These statues of Bacchus and
Mercury are not exquisite. Your citadel of Acro-Corinthus is not strong,
compared with that which I offer to the poorest slave who puts down his
burden at that brazen gate. You Corinthians think this is a splendid
city; you think you have heard all sweet sounds and seen all beautiful
sights. But, I tell you, eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for
them that love Him.” Following up Paul’s line of thought, we may say
the Bible, now, is the scaffolding to the rising Temple, but when the
building is done there will be no further use for the scaffolding.


PHARAOH.

One of the most intensely interesting things I saw in Egypt was Pharaoh
of olden times--the very Pharaoh who oppressed the Israelites. The
inscription on his sarcophagus and the writing on his mummy bandages
prove beyond controversy that he was the Pharaoh of Bible times. All the
Egyptologists and the explorations agree that it is the old scoundrel
himself.

Visible are the very teeth with which he gnashed against the Israelitish
brick makers. There are the sockets of the merciless eyes with which
he looked upon the over-burdened people of God. There is the hair that
floated in the breeze off the Red Sea. There are the very lips with which
he commanded the children of Israel to make bricks without straw.

Thousands of years afterward, when the wrappings of the mummy were
unrolled, old Pharaoh lifted up his arm as if in imploration; but his
skinny bones can not again clutch his shattered scepter. He is a dead
lion.


PONTIUS PILATE.

At about seven o’clock in the morning, up the marble stairs of a palace
and across the floors of richest mosaic and under ceilings dyed with all
the splendors of color and between snowbanks of white and glistening
sculpture, passes a poor, pale and sick young man of thirty-three years,
already condemned to death, on his way to be condemned again. Jesus of
Nazareth is His name.

Coming out to meet him on this tesselated pavement is an unscrupulous,
compromising, time-serving and cowardly man, with a few traces of
sympathy and fair dealing left in his composition--Governor Pontius
Pilate.

Did ever such opposites meet? Luxury and pain, selfishness and
generosity, arrogance and humility, sin and holiness, midnight and
midnoon.

The bloated-lipped governor takes the cushioned seat, but the prisoner
stands, his wrists manacled. In a semicircle around the prisoner are the
Sanhedrists, with eyes flashing and fists brandished, prosecuting this
case in the name of their religion.

The most bitter persecutions have been religious persecutions, and when
Satan takes hold of a good man he makes up by intensity for brevity of
occupation. If you have never seen an ecclesiastical court trying a man,
then you have no idea of the foaming infernalism of those old religious
Sanhedrists.

Governor Pilate cross-questions the prisoner, and he finds right away
that he is innocent; so he wants to let him go. His caution is also
increased by some one who comes to the governor and whispers in his
ear. The governor puts his hand behind his ear, so as to catch the words
almost inaudible.

These whispered words are a message from Claudia Procula, his wife, who
has had a dream about the innocence of this prisoner and about the danger
of executing him, and she awakens from this morning dream in time to send
the message to her husband, who was at that hour on the judicial bench.

And what with the protest of his wife, the voice of his own conscience
and the entire failure of the Sanhedrists to make out their case Governor
Pilate resolves to discharge the prisoner from custody.

But the intimation of such a thing brings upon the governor an
equinoctial storm of indignation. They will report him to the emperor
at Rome. They will have him recalled. They will send him up home, and
he will be hanged for treason, for the emperor has already a suspicion
in regard to Pilate, and that suspicion does not cease until Pilate is
banished and commits suicide.

So Governor Pontius Pilate compromises the matter, and proposes that
Christ be whipped instead of assassinated. So the prisoner is fastened to
a low pillar, and on his bent and bared back come the thongs of leather,
with pieces of lead and bone intertwisted, so that every stroke shall be
the more awful.

Christ lifts Himself from the scourging with flushed cheek and torn and
quivering and mangled flesh, presenting a spectacle of suffering in which
Rubens, the painter, found the theme for his greatest masterpiece.

But the Sanhedrists are not yet satisfied. They have had some of the
prisoner’s nerves lacerated; but they want them all lacerated. They
have had some of his blood; now they want all of it, down to the last
corpuscle.

So Governor Pontius Pilate, after all this merciful hesitation,
surrenders to the demoniacal cry:

“Crucify him! Crucify him!”

But the governor sends for something. He sends a slave out to get
something. Although the constables are in haste to take the prisoner to
execution, and the mob outside are impatient to glare upon their victim,
a pause is necessitated.

Yonder it comes--a wash basin. Some pure, bright water is poured into
it, and then Governor Pilate puts his white and delicate hands into the
water and rubs them together, and then lifts them dripping, for the towel
fastened at the slave’s girdle, while he practically says:

“I wash my hands of this whole homicidal transaction. I wash my hands of
this entire responsibility. You will have to bear it.”

Behold in this that ceremony amounts to nothing, if there are not
contained in it correspondences of heart and life.

It is a good thing to wash the hands. God created three-fourths of the
world water, and in that act commanded cleanliness; and when the ancients
did not take the hint, He plunged the whole world under water, and kept
it there for some time.

Hand washing was a religious ceremony among the Jews. The Jewish Mishna
gave particular directions how that the hands must be thrust three times
up to the wrist in water, and the palm of the hand must then be rubbed
with the closed fist of the other.

All that was well enough for a symbol, but here is a man in the case
under consideration who proposes to wash away the guilt of a sin which he
does not quit and of which he does not make any repentance. Pilate’s wash
basin was a dead failure.

Ceremonies, however beautiful and appropriate, may be no more than this
hypocritical ablution. In infancy we may be sprinkled from the baptismal
font, and in manhood we may wade into deep immersion, and yet never
come to moral purification. We may kneel without prayer and bow without
reverence, and sing without any acceptance. All your creeds, liturgies,
sacraments, genuflections and religious convocations amount to nothing
unless your heart-life go into them.

When that bronzed slave took from the presence of Pilate that wash basin
he carried away none of Pilate’s cruelty, wickedness or guilt.

Nothing against creeds; we all have them--either written or implied.
Nothing against ceremonies; they are of infinite importance. Nothing
against sacraments; they are divinely commanded. Nothing against rosary,
if there be as many heartfelt prayers as beads counted. Nothing against
incense floating up from censer amid Gothic arches, if the prayers be as
genuine as the ceremony is sweet. Nothing against Epiphany, Lent, Ash
Wednesday, Easter, Good Friday, Whitsuntide or Palm Sunday, if these
symbols have behind them genuine repentance, holy reminiscence and
Christian consecration.

But ceremony is only the sheath to the sword; it is only the shell to
the kernel; it is only the lamp to the flame; it is only the body to the
spirit. The outward must be symbolical of the inward. Wash the hands, by
all means; but, more than all, wash the heart.

Behold, also, as you see Governor Pontius Pilate thrust his hands into
his wash basin, the power of conscience. He had an idea there was blood
on his hands--the blood of an innocent person, whom he might have
acquitted if he only had the courage.

Poor Pilate! His conscience was after him, and he knew the stain would
never be washed from the right hand or the left hand; that, until the day
of his death, though he might wash in all the lavers of the Roman Empire,
there would be still eight fingers and two thumbs red at the tips.

Alas for this Governor Pontius Pilate! That night, after the court had
adjourned and the Sanhedrists had gone home and nothing was heard outside
the room but the step of the sentinel, I see Pontius Pilate arise from
his tapestried and sleepless couch and go to the laver and begin to wash
his hands, crying: “Out! Out, crimson spot! Tellest thou to me and to God
and to the night my crime? Is there no alkali to remove these dreadful
stains? Is there no chemistry to dissolve this carnage? Must I to the day
of my death carry the blood of this innocent man on my heart and hand?
Out, thou crimson spot!”

Against the disappointing and insufficient laver of Pilate’s vice,
cowardice and sin I place the brazen sea of a Savior’s pardoning mercy!


QUEEN OF SHEBA.

What is that long procession approaching Jerusalem? I think, from the
pomp of it, there must be royalty in the train. I smell the breath of
the spices which are brought as presents, and I hear the shout of the
drivers, and I see the dust-covered caravan, showing that they come from
far away. Cry the news up to the palace:

“The Queen of Sheba advances.”

Let all the people come out to see. Let the mighty men of the land come
out on the palace corridors. Let King Solomon come down the stairs of
the palace before the Queen has alighted. Shake out the cinnamon and the
saffron, the calamus and the frankincense, and pass it into the treasure
house. Take up the diamonds until they glitter in the sun!

The Queen of Sheba alights.

She enters the palace.

She washes at the bath.

She sits down at the banquet.

The cup bearers bow. The meat smokes. The music trembles in the dash of
the waters from the modern sea. Then she rises from the banquet, walks
through the conservatories, gazes on the architectural marvels, and asks
Solomon many strange questions. Thus she learns about the religion of the
Hebrews, and then and there she becomes a servant of Jehovah.

The Queen of Sheba is overwhelmed. She begins to think that all the
spices that she brought, and all the precious woods which are intended to
be turned into harps and psalteries and into railings for the causeway
between the Temple and the palace and the $1,800,000 in money--she begins
to think that all these presents amount to nothing in such a palace; and
she is almost ashamed that she has brought them, and she says within
herself:

“I heard a great deal about this place and about this wonderful religion
of the Hebrews, but I find it far beyond my highest anticipations. I must
add more than 50 per cent to what has been related. It exceeds every
thing that could have been expected. The half was not told me.”

What a beautiful thing it is when social position and wealth surrender
themselves to God! When religion comes to a neighborhood, the first
to receive it are the women. Some men say it is because they are weak
minded. I say it is because they have quicker perception of what is
right, more ardent affection and capacity for sublimer emotion.

After the women have received the Gospel, then all the distressed and the
poor of both sexes--those who have no friend except Jesus. Last of all
come the greatly prospered. Alas, that it is so!

Do you know where Sheba was? Some say it was in Abyssinia; others say it
was in the southern part of Arabia Felix. In either case it was a great
way off from Jerusalem. To get from there to Jerusalem the Queen of Sheba
had to cross a country infested with bandits and go across blistering
deserts.

Why did not the Queen of Sheba stay at home and send a committee to
inquire about this new religion, and have the delegates report in regard
to that religion and wealth of King Solomon? She wanted to see for
herself and hear for herself. She could not do this by work of committee.
She felt that she had a soul worth ten thousand kingdoms like Sheba, and
she wanted a robe richer than any woven by Oriental shuttles, and she
wanted a crown set with the jewels of eternity.

Bring out the camels. Put on the spices. Gather up the jewels of the
throne and put them on the caravan. Start now--no time is to be lost.
Goad on the camels. When I see that caravan--dust-covered, weary and
exhausted--trudging on across the desert and among the banditti until it
reaches Jerusalem, I say: “There is an earnest seeker after truth.”


SALOME.

This is the anniversary of Herod’s birthday. The palace is lighted. The
highways leading thereto are all ablaze with the pomp of invited guests.
Lords, captains, merchant princes, and all the mighty men of the land are
coming to mingle in the festivities.

The table is spread with all the luxuries that royal purveyors can
gather. The guests, white robed and anointed and perfumed, come and sit
at the table.

Music! The jests evoke roars of laughter. Riddles are propounded.
Repartee is indulged. Toasts are drank. The brain is befogged. The wit
rolls on into uproar and blasphemy. They are not satisfied yet. Turn on
more light. Pour out more wine. Music! Sound all the trumpets. Clear
the floor for a dance. Bring in Salome, the beautiful and accomplished
princess. The door opens, and in bounds the dancer. The lords are
enchanted. Stand back and make room for the brilliant gyrations. These
men never saw such “poetry of motion.” Their souls whirl in the reel and
bound with the bounding feet.

Herod forgets crown and throne and every thing but the fascinations of
Salome. All the magnificence of his realm is as nothing compared with
the splendor that whirls on tiptoe before him. His body sways from side
to side, corresponding with the motions of the enchantress. His soul is
filled with the pulsations of the feet and bewitched with the taking
postures and attitudes more and more amazing.

After a while Herod sits in enchanted silence, looking at the flashing,
leaping, bouncing beauty, and as the dance closes and the tinkling
cymbals cease to clap and the thunders of applause that shook the palace
begin to abate, the enchanted monarch swears to the princely performer:

“Whatsoever thou shalt ask of me I will give it thee, to the half of my
kingdom.”

Now, there was in the prison at that time a minister of the Gospel by
the name of John the Baptist, and he had been making a great deal of
trouble by preaching some very plain sermons. He had denounced the sins
of the king and brought down upon him the wrath of the women of the royal
household.

At the instigation of her mother, Salome takes advantage of the
extravagant promise of the king, and says: “Bring me the head of John
the Baptist on a dinner plate.”

Hark to the sound of feet outside the door and the clatter of swords! The
executioners are returning from their awful errand. Open the door. They
enter and present the platter to Salome.

What is on this platter?

A new glass of wine to continue the uproarious merriment? No. Something
redder and far more costly--the ghastly, bleeding head of John the
Baptist. The death glare is still in the eyes; the locks are all dabbled
with gore; the features are still distressed with the last agony.

Salome, this enchantress who had whirled so gracefully in the dance,
bends over the awful burden without a shudder. She gloats over the blood,
and with as much indifference as a waiting maid might take a tray of
empty glassware out of the room after an entertainment Salome carries the
dissevered head of John the Baptist, while all the banqueters shout with
laughter. They regarded it as a capital joke that in so easy and quick a
way they have got rid of an earnest and outspoken minister of the true
Gospel.

Well, there is no harm in a birthday festival. All the kings from
Pharaoh’s time had celebrated such occasions, and why not Herod? No harm
in kindling the lights. No harm in spreading the banquet. No harm in
arousing music. But from the riot and wassail that closed the scene of
that day every pure nature revolts.


SAUL.

The Amalekites thought they had conquered God, and that He would not
carry into execution His threats against them.

They had murdered the Israelites in battle and out of battle, and had
left no outrage untried. For four hundred years this had been going on,
and they said: “God either dare not punish us, or He has forgotten to do
so.”

Let us see.

Samuel, God’s prophet, tells Saul to go down and slay all the Amalekites,
not leaving one of them alive; also to destroy all the beasts in their
possession--sheep, ox, camel and ass.

Hark! I hear the tread of two hundred and ten thousand men, with
monstrous Saul at their head, ablaze with armor, his shield dangling at
his side, holding in his hand a spear, at the waving of which the great
host marched or halted.

The sound of their feet, shaking the Earth, seems like the tread of the
great God, as, marching in vengeance, He tramples nations into the dust.

I see smoke curling against the sky. Now there is a thick cloud of it,
and now I see the whole city rising in a chariot of smoke, behind steeds
of fire.

Saul has set the city ablaze.

The Amalekites and Israelites meet; the trumpets of battle blow peal on
peal, and there is a death hush.

Then there is a signal waved; swords cut and hack; javelins ring on
shields; arms fall from trunks and heads roll into the dust. Gash after
gash, the frenzied yell, the gurgling of throttled throats, the cry of
pain, the laugh of revenge, the curse hissed between clenched teeth--an
army’s death groan. Stacks of dead on all sides, with eyes unshut and
mouths yet grinning vengeance.

Huzza for the Israelites! Two hundred and ten thousand men wave their
plumes and clap their shields, for the Lord God has given them the
victory.

Yet the victorious warriors of Israel are conquered by sheep and oxen.

God, through His prophet, Samuel, told Saul to slay all the Amalekites,
and to slay all the beasts in their possession; but Saul, thinking that
he knows more than God, spares Agag, the Amalekitish king, and five
droves of sheep and a herd of oxen that he can not bear to kill.

Saul drives the sheep and oxen down toward home. He has no idea that
Samuel, the prophet, will discover that he has saved these sheep and oxen
for himself.

But Samuel comes and asks Saul the news from the battle. Saul puts on
a solemn face--for there is no one who can look more solemn than your
genuine hypocrite--and he says: “I have fulfilled the commandment of the
Lord.”

Samuel listens, and he hears the drove of sheep a little way off. Saul
had no idea the prophet’s ear would be so acute.

Samuel says to Saul: “If you have done as God told you, and have slain
all the Amalekites and all the beasts in their possession, what meaneth
the bleating of the sheep in mine ears and the lowing of the oxen, that I
hear?”

Ah! One would have thought that blushes would have consumed the cheeks
of Saul. No, no! He says the army--not himself, of course, but the
army--saved the sheep and oxen for sacrifice; and then they thought it
would be too bad, anyhow, to kill Agag, the Amalekitish king.

Samuel takes the sword, and he slashes King Agag to pieces; and then he
takes the skirt of his coat, in true Oriental style, and rends it in
twain--as much as to say:

“You, Saul, just like that, shall be torn away from your empire, and torn
away from your throne.”

In other words, let all the nations of Earth hear the story that Saul, by
disobeying God, won a flock of sheep but lost a kingdom.

A hypocrite is one who pretends to be what he is not, or to do what he
does not. Saul was only a type of a class. When the fox prays, look to
your chickens.

Do not be hypocritical in any thing; you are never safe if you are. At
the most inopportune moment, the sheep will bleat and the oxen will
bellow.


SOLOMON.

What is that building out yonder, glittering in the sunshine? Have you
not heard?

It is the House of the Forest of Lebanon. King Solomon has just taken
to it his bride, the princess of Egypt. You see the pillars of the
portico and a great tower, adorned with a thousand shields of gold, hung
on the outside of the tower. Five hundred of the shields of gold were
manufactured at Solomon’s order, and five hundred were captured by David,
his father, in battle. See how they blaze in the noonday sun!

Solomon goes up to the ivory stairs of his throne between twelve lions in
statuary, and sits down on the back of the golden bull, the head of the
bronze beast turned toward the people.

The family and attendants of the king are so many that the caterers of
the place have to provide every day one hundred sheep and thirteen oxen,
besides the birds and the venison. I hear the stamping and pawing of four
thousand horses in the royal stables.

They were important officials who had charge of the work of gathering the
straw and the barley for all these horses.

King Solomon was an early riser, tradition says, and used to take a ride
out at daybreak; and when in his white apparel, behind the swiftest
horses of all the kingdom and followed by mounted archers in purple, as
the cavalcade dashed through the streets of Jerusalem I suppose it was
something worth getting up at five o’clock in the morning to look at.

Solomon was not like some of the kings of the present day--crowned
imbecility. All the splendor of his palace and retinue was eclipsed by
his intellectual powers. Why, he seemed to know every thing. He was the
first great naturalist the world ever saw. Peacocks from India strutted
the basaltic walks, and apes chattered in the trees and deer stalked
the parks, and there were aquariums with foreign fish and aviaries with
foreign birds; and tradition says these birds were so well tamed that
Solomon might walk clear across the city under the shadow of their wings
as they hovered and flitted about him.

King Solomon had a great reputation for the conundrums and riddles that
he made and guessed. He and King Hiram, his neighbor, used to sit by the
hour and ask riddles, each one paying in money if he could not answer or
guess the riddle.

The Solomonic navy visited all the world, and the sailors, of course,
talked about the wealth of their king, and about the riddles and enigmas
that he made and solved.

Solomon had at his command gold to the value of £680,000,000, and he had
silver to the value of £1,029,000,377. The Queen of Sheba made him a nice
little present of £720,000, and King Hiram made him a present of the same
amount.

If Solomon had lost the value of a whole realm out of his pocket, it
would hardly have been worth his while to stoop down and pick it up.

He wrote one thousand and five songs. He wrote three thousand proverbs.
He wrote about almost every thing. The Bible says distinctly he wrote
about plants, from the cedar of Lebanon to the hyssop that grows out of
the wall, and about birds and beasts and fishes.

No doubt he put off his royal robes, and put on the hunter’s trappings,
and went out with his arrows to bring down the rarest specimens of birds;
and then with his fishing apparatus he went down to the streams to bring
up the denizens of the deep, and plunged into the forest and found the
rarest specimens of flowers. He then came back to his study and wrote
books about zoology, the science of animals; about ichthyology, the
science of fishes; about ornithology, the science of birds; about botany,
the science of plants.

Did any other city ever behold so wonderful a man?

His fame spread abroad, and Queen Balkis, away to the south, heard of
it. She sent messengers with a few riddles that she would like to have
Solomon solve and a few puzzles which she would like to have him find out.

She sent to King Solomon, among other things, a diamond with a hole so
small that a needle would not penetrate it, asking him to thread that
diamond. Solomon took a worm and put it at the opening in the diamond,
and the worm crawled through, leaving the thread in the diamond.

This queen also sent a goblet to Solomon, asking him to fill it with
water that did not pour from the sky, and that did not rush out from the
earth. Immediately the wise man put a slave on the back of a swift horse
and galloped him around and around the park until the horse was nigh
exhausted, and from the perspiration of the horse the goblet was filled.

She also sent King Solomon five hundred boys in girls’ dress and five
hundred girls in boys’ dress, wondering if he would be acute enough to
find out the deception. Immediately Solomon, when he saw them wash their
faces, knew from the way they applied the water it was all a cheat.

Queen Balkis was so pleased with the acuteness of Solomon that she said:
“I will just go and see him.”

Yonder it comes--the cavalcade--horses and dromedaries, chariots and
charioteers, jingling harness and clattering hoofs, and blazing shields,
and flying ensigns, and clapping cymbals.

The place is saturated with perfumes. She brings cinnamon, saffron,
calamus, frankincense and all manner of sweet spices. As the retinue
sweeps through the gate the armed guards inhale the aroma. “Halt!” cry
the charioteers, as the wheels grind the gravel in front of the pillared
portico of the king. Queen Balkis alights in an atmosphere bewitching
with perfume. As the dromedaries are driven up to the king’s storehouses
and the bundles of camphor are unloaded, and the cinnamon sacks and the
boxes of spices are opened, the purveyors of the palace discovered, so
the Bible relates: “Of spices, great abundance; neither was there any
such spices as the Queen of Sheba gave to King Solomon.”

Well, my friends, you know that all theologians agree in making Solomon
a type of Christ and making the Queen of Sheba a type of every truth
seeker, and I take the responsibility of saying that all the spikenard,
cassia and frankincense which the Queen of Sheba brought to King Solomon
are mightily suggestive of the sweet spice of our holy religion.


THE GENTILE MOTHER.

It was a Sabbath afternoon in the Belleville parsonage. I had been trying
for two years to preach, but to me the Christian life had been nothing
but a struggle. I sat down at the table, took up my Bible, and asked for
divine illumination; and it poured like sunlight upon my soul through the
story of the Syro-Phenician woman.

This woman was a mother, and she had an afflicted daughter. The child had
a virulent, exasperating and convulsive disease, called the possession of
the devil.

The mother was just like other mothers; she had no peace as long as
her child was sick. She was a Gentile, and the Jews had such a perfect
contempt for the Gentiles that they called them dogs. Nevertheless, she
comes to Christ, and asks Him to help her in her family troubles. Christ
makes no answer. The people become afraid there is going to be a “scene”
enacted, and they try to get the woman out of Christ’s presence; but He
forbids her expulsion. Then she falls down and repeats her request.

Christ, to rally her earnestness, and to make His mercy finally more
conspicuous, addresses her, saying: “It is not meet to take the
children’s bread [that is, the salvation appointed for the Jews] and cast
it to dogs”--the Gentiles. Christ did not mean to characterize that woman
as a dog. That would have been most unlike Him, who from the cross said:
“Behold thy mother.”

His whole life was so gentle and so loving, He could not have given it
out as His opinion that that was what she ought to be called; but He
was only employing the ordinary parlance of the Jews in regard to the
Gentiles. Yet that mother was not to be put off, pleading as she was for
the life of her daughter. She was not to be rebuffed; she was not to be
discouraged. She says:

“Yea, Lord, I acknowledge I am a Gentile dog; but I remember that even
the dogs have some privileges, and when the door is open they slink in
and crawl under the table. When the bread or the meat sifts through the
cracks of the table or falls off the edge of it, they pick it up, and
the master of the house is not angry with them. I do not ask for a big
loaf; I do not ask even for a big slice; I only ask for that which drops
down through the chinks of the table--the dogs’ portion. I ask only the
crumbs.”

Christ felt the wit and the earnestness and the stratagem and the faith
of that woman. He turns upon her and says:

“You have conquered Me. Your daughter is well now. Go home, mother; but
before you get there she will come down, skipping out to meet you.”

There I see the mother going. She feels full twenty years younger now.
She is getting on in life, but she goes with a half run. Amid an outburst
of hysterical laughter and tears they meet. The mother breaks down every
time she tries to tell it. The daughter is before her, with cheeks as
rosy as before she fell in the first fit. The doctors of the village
prophesy that the cure will not last, because it was not according to
their prescription. But I read in the oldest medical journal in the
world: “The daughter was made whole from that very hour.”

This story shows you Jesus with His back turned. That woman came to Him
and said: “Lord, spare the life of my child; it will not cost You any
thing.” Jesus turned His back. He threw positive discouragement on her
petition. Jesus stood with His face to blind Bartimeus, to the foaming
demoniac, to the limping paralytic, to the sea when He hushed it, and to
the grave when He broke it; but now He turns His back.

I asked an artist if he ever saw a representation of Jesus Christ with
His back turned. He said no. And it is a fact that you may go through all
the picture galleries of London, Dresden, Rome, Florence and Naples, and
you will find Christ with full face and profile, but never with His back
turned. Yet here, in this passage, He turned away from the woman.


ZACCHÆUS.

Zacchæus was a politician and a tax gatherer. He had an honest calling,
but the opportunity for “stealings” was so large that the temptation was
too much for him.

The Bible says that Zacchæus was “a sinner”--that is, in the public
sense. How many fine men have been ruined by official position! It is
an awful thing for any man to seek office under government unless his
principles of integrity are deeply fixed. Many a man, upright in an
insignificant position, has made shipwreck in a great one. So far as I
can tell, in the city of Jericho this Zacchæus belonged to what might be
called the “ring.”

They had things their own way, successfully avoiding exposure--if by no
other way, perhaps by hiring somebody to break in and steal the vouchers.

Notwithstanding his bad reputation, there were some streaks of good about
Zacchæus--as there are about almost every man. Gold is found in quartz,
and sometimes in a very small percentage.

Jesus was coming to town. The people all turned out to see Him. Here He
comes--the Lord of Glory--on foot, dust-covered and road-weary, limping
along the way, carrying the griefs and woes of the world. Christ looks to
be sixty years of age, when He is only about thirty.

Zacchæus was a short man, and could not see over the people’s heads while
standing on the ground; so he got up into a sycamore tree that swung its
arm clear over the road.

Jesus advanced amid the wild excitement of the surging crowd. The most
honorable and popular men of the city are looking on, and are trying to
gain His attention. But Jesus, instead of regarding them, looks up at the
little man in the tree, and says:

“Zacchæus, come down. I am going home with you.”

All regretted to see such choice of company.

Zacchæus had mounted the sycamore tree out of mere curiosity. He wanted
to see how this stranger looked--the color of his eyes, the length of his
hair, the contour of his features, the height of his stature.

I see Christ entering the front door of the house of Zacchæus. The King
of Heaven and Earth sits down; and as He looks around on the place and
the family, He pronounces the benediction: “This day is salvation come to
this house.”


NEARER, MY GOD, TO THEE.

    Nearer, my God, to Thee--
      Nearer to Thee!
    E’en though a cross it be
      That raiseth me,
    Still all my song shall be:
    Nearer, my God, to Thee--
      Nearer to Thee!

    Though, like a wanderer,
      The sun gone down,
    Darkness be over me,
      My rest a stone,
    Yet in my dreams I’d be
    Nearer, my God, to Thee
      Nearer to Thee!

    There let the way appear
      Steps unto Heaven;
    All that Thou sendest me
      In mercy given!
    Angels to beckon me
    Nearer, my God, to Thee--
      Nearer to Thee!

    Then, with my waking thoughts
      Bright with Thy praise,
    Out of my stony griefs
      Bethel I’ll raise;
    So, by my woes, to be
    Nearer, my God, to Thee--
      Nearer to Thee!

    Or if, on joyful wing
      Cleaving the sky--
    Sun, Moon and stars forgot--
      Upward I fly,
    Still all my song shall be:
    Nearer, my God, to Thee--
      Nearer to Thee!




BIBLE CHARACTERS

DISCUSSED AND ANALYZED BY THE SCHOLARLY DIVINE, JOSEPH PARKER, D. D.


ABIJAH.

We forget Abijah’s character in his eloquence. He carries a spell with
him. Judging from his speech, one would suppose him faultless--entirely
noble in every aspiration and impulse and sublimely religious and
unselfish.

The whole Abijah is not here. This is but the ideal Abijah. Who ever
shows himself wholly upon any one occasion? Who does not sometimes go
forth in his best clothing?

We must read the account of Abijah which is given in the Book of Kings
before we can correctly estimate the Abijah who talks in the Book of
Chronicles.

It is, perhaps, encouraging that while men are upon the Earth they should
not be so dazzlingly good as to blind their fellow men. Yet it is pitiful
to observe how men can be religious for the occasion. Nearly all men are
religious at a funeral; but few men are religious at a wedding.

Abijah has a great cause to serve, and he addresses himself to it not
only with the skill of a rhetorician but with the piety of a mind that
never tenanted a worldly thought. God knows the whole character--how
bright we are in points, how dark in many places; how lofty, how
low. Knowing all, He judges correctly, and His mercy is His delight.
Neither God nor man is to be judged by one aspect, or one attribute, or
one quality. We must comprehend, so far as we may be able, the whole
circuit of character and purpose before we can come to a large and true
conclusion.

But as we have to do with the ideal Abijah, let us hear what he has to
say in his ideal capacity. We will forget his faults while we listen to
the music of his religious eloquence.

Abijah comes before us like a man who has a good cause to plead. He fixes
his feet upon a mountain as upon a natural throne, and from its summit
he addresses a king and a nation, and he addresses his auditors in the
sacred name of “the Lord God of Israel.” He will not begin the argument
at a superficial point, or take it as starting from yesterday’s new raw
history--history hardly settled into form. He will go back, and with
great sweep of historical reference he will establish his claim to be
heard. In II. Chronicles, thirteenth chapter and fifth verse, Abijah asks:

“Ought ye not to know that the Lord God of Israel gave the kingdom over
Israel to David for ever, even to him and to his sons by a covenant of
salt?”

The binding covenant--the covenant that even pagans would not break.
If you have eaten salt with a man you can never speak evil of him with
an honest heart. You must forget your criticism in the remembrance of
the salt. You are at liberty to decline intercourse and fellowship and
confidence; you are perfectly at liberty to say: “I will have nothing
to do with thee in any association whatsoever.” But you can not be both
friend and enemy. You can not eat salt with a man and smite him in the
face, or wound him in the heel, or hurt him in any way, at any time, in
any line or point.

That was pagan morality.

We are fallen a long way behind it in many cases, for what Christian is
there who could not eat all the salt a man has, and then go out and speak
about him with bitterness, plunder him, frustrate his plans, anticipate
him in some business venture, and laugh at him over his misplaced
confidence?

Abijah recognized the perpetuity of the covenant. The kingdom was given
to David for ever--if not in words, yet in spirit; if chapter and verse
can not be quoted, yet the whole spirit of the divine communion with
David meant eternity of election and honor. It is right to hold up the
ideal covenant; it is right that even men who themselves have broken
covenants should insist that covenants are right. We must never forget
the ideal. Our prayers must express our better selves. A dying thief may
pray. Again and again we have to fall back upon the holy doctrine that a
man is not to be judged in his character by the prayers which he offers,
inasmuch as his prayers represent what he would be if he could.

Abijah, having to deal with a perpetual covenant, charges Jeroboam with
breaking it:

“Yet Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon, the son of
David, is risen up, and hath rebelled against his Lord.”

All rebellion is wrong, unless it arises from a sense of injustice,
untruthfulness or dishonesty. No man has a right to dissent from the
national Church unless his dissent be founded upon conscience, a right
conception of the nature of the Kingdom of Christ upon the Earth, which
leads him to say to certain men: “Stand off.”

No part of the empire has a right to arise against the central authority,
of which itself constitutes a part, merely for the sake of expressing
political prejudice or selfish design. Every rebellion must be put down
that can not justify itself by the very spirit and genius of justice.
Separation becomes schism when it but expresses a whim, an aversion, of
a superficial or technical kind; and every rebellion is wickedness, is
born of the spirit of the pit, that can not justify itself by appeals to
justice, nobleness, liberty and God.

Yet our rebellions have made our history.

We should have been in slavery but for rebellion. The rebels are the
heretics that have created orthodoxy. We owe nothing to the indifferent,
the languid, the selfish, the calculating, the let-alone people who
simply want to eat and drink and sleep and die. That they were ever born
is either an affront to nature or is the supreme mystery of human life.

Abijah, therefore, is perfectly right when he insists upon mere rebellion
being put down; but when rebellion expresses the spirit of justice
and the spirit of progress--the new revelation, the new day--all the
Abijahs that ever addressed the world can only keep back the issue for a
measurable period.

The accusation of Abijah was that Jeroboam had “gathered unto him
vain men, the children of Belial.” For “vain men” read “sons of
worthlessness”--empty fellows, who will join any mob that pays best; men
who will cheer any speaker for a half-crown an hour, and put out anybody
on any plea on any side for extra remuneration.

Where do these men come from? Whose language do they speak? Whose image
and superscription do they bear?

They are in every country; they worship in the sanctuary of mischief
and bow down at the altar of selfishness. They know not what they
do. They will make a cross for a day’s wages. Evil company follows
evil men. Worthless fellows are soon dissatisfied with the company of
righteousness; the intercourse becomes monotonous and suffocating. A bad
man could not live in Heaven. It is not in the power of mercy to save men
from hell, for they carry hell with them; they are perdition.

Who can wonder if desecration followed in the steps of worthlessness?
Abijah asks:

“Have ye not cast out the priests of the Lord, the sons of Aaron and the
Levites, and have made you priests after the manner of the nations of
other lands, so that whosoever cometh to consecrate himself with a young
bullock and seven rams, the same may be a priest of them that are no
gods?”

Let them bring the offering, and then they may become priests and do what
they please at altars that have no foundations, the incense of which is
a cloud that Heaven will not absorb. William Rufus declared that church
bread was sweet bread. How many men have eaten church bread who ought
to have died of hunger! What responsibility attaches to some people in
this matter! Church bread ought never to be given away--ought never to be
dishonored with the name of a “living.” No man should be in the Church
who could not make five times the money out of it that he ever made
in it. It should be felt that if he put forth all his power--both his
hands, his whole mind and strength--he could be the greatest man in the
commonwealth.

Jeroboam would admit any one to the altar; he would make room if there
was none; he would cast out a priest of the Lord to make room for a
priest of Belial. This is the accusation which Abijah brings against
Jeroboam and his company of rebels.

Now Abijah turns to state his own case. He tells us what he and his
people are:

“But as for us, the Lord is our God, and we have not forsaken Him;
and the priests, which minister unto the Lord, are the sons of Aaron,
and the Levites wait upon their business. And they burn unto the Lord
every morning and every evening burnt sacrifices and sweet incense;
the shew-bread also set they in order upon the pure table; and the
candlestick of gold with the lamps thereof, to burn every evening; for
we keep the charge of the Lord our God; but ye have forsaken Him.”

What a character Abijah gives himself!

Let us remember that we are dealing with an ideal man, and not with the
real personality.

Take this, however, as an ideal representation, and how perfect it is in
every line! “The Lord is our God.” We have a sound and vital theology; we
have a clear upward look, and no cloud conceals the face divine; no idols
have we--no images of wood, no pillars, no groves, no high places where
idolatry may be performed as an entertainment.

The man reasons well. He insists upon having corner stones in any edifice
or argument he puts up. When he accuses, he goes back to the covenant of
salt; when he claims a right position, he claims that it is a theological
one. He holds the right God. Losing the right theology, we lose all the
detail with it. When the conception of God is wrong, no other conception
can be right. It is only bold because it is true to say that if a man has
not the right desire after the right God he can not keep correct weights
and scales. The custom house, the inland revenue, the excise--call it
what you please--may to some extent keep him up to the right mark, but
in his soul he takes in every customer that comes near him; if he does
not, he loses sleep. This applies to the so-called heathen as well as to
the Christian. It is not necessary that a man should have a clear and
perfect revelation of God, but that in his heart he feels that he is a
creature, not a creator; a subject, not a sovereign; that he is under
responsibility, and not above it. In that proportion only can he deal
righteously and nobly with his fellow men.

“And the priests, which minister unto the Lord, are the sons of Aaron,
and the Levites wait upon their business.”

Here is apostolic succession before the time of the invention of the
term. Here is an excellent pedigree, a most complete genealogy. Our
priests are in the Aaronic line, and the Levites know their business and
keep to it; every thing is in order in our Church.

That is beautiful, and that is right. We need not shrink from adding,
that is necessary. We must have nothing to do with men who are not in
the Aaronic and apostolic succession; they must not occupy our pulpits,
nor be allowed to make pulpits of their own; no man must sell them wood
or stone with which to construct a pulpit; they must be forbidden by the
genius of law from ever preaching or attempting to preach.

When we let go the doctrine of apostolic succession we let go a vital
treasure and blessing.

We may differ as to our definition of “apostolic succession,” but surely
there can be no difference among frank and enlightened hearts and minds
as to what apostolic succession is. No man is in the apostolic succession
who is not in the apostolic spirit, and no man is out of the apostolic
succession who is animated by the spirit of the apostles. That is not a
spirit which is conferred by the tips of any fingers; that is the gift of
God.

Do you see your calling, brethren? God has chosen you. What a Church
is God’s! Not a Church of wax-works, all made at one factory, and all
charged for in one invoice; but living men, characterized by innumerable
individualities--some broad as the firmament, others beautiful and tender
as little flowers that can only grow in the fullest sun-warmth; some
military in argument and in discipline, others persuasive in pathos,
sympathy and tenderness.

There is no monotony in God. One star differeth from another in glory;
no two blades of grass are microscopically identical. There is a common
likeness in the worlds and in the sub-economies of Nature, but the more
penetrating our vision is made by mechanical and scientific aids the more
wondrous in difference are discovered to be the very things which are
supposed to be identical.

We must never allow the apostolic succession to be handed about without
its being accompanied by the apostolic spirit. Every man is in the
apostolic succession who believes in the apostles, who follows them as
they followed Christ, and who would know nothing among men but Jesus
Christ and Him crucified.

“And they burn unto the Lord every morning and every evening burnt
sacrifices and sweet incense; the shew-bread also set they in order upon
the pure table; and the candlestick of gold with the lamps thereof, to
burn every evening.”

At that time piety was mechanical. It could not be otherwise. God never
forces history. The days come, each with its own burden and its own
blessing, its own dawn and its own apocalypse. We can not have today what
is due tomorrow. God’s seasons move in measured revolution, and come
to us in orderly and timely procession; and no man can hasten them by
lighting his camp fire, or striking his matches, or kindling his little
inflammable powder.

We can not imitate the Sun.

Some have tried to mimic the stars; but where is the image of the Sun
that the Sun has not obliterated by one mid-day look?

The time came when all these ordinances were set aside. There was to
be no more burning; there was to be no morning sacrifice and evening
sacrifice and sweet incense, or shew-bread and candlestick of gold and
lamps thereof for evening burning.

“Ye are not come unto the mount that might be touched, and that burned
with fire, nor unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest, and the sound
of a trumpet, and the voice of words; which voice they that heard
intreated that the word should not be spoken to them any more; but ye are
come unto Mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels, to the general
assembly and church of the first-born, which are written in Heaven, and
to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect,
and to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of
sprinkling, that speaketh better things than that of Abel.”

So we may misuse history by going back and making that necessary which
has already been abrogated. We may thus ill-treat the day of rest, by
measuring it and weighing it in Jewish scales. We may cast a cloud over
the day of jubilee that comes every week, by measuring its beginning and
its ending by Jewish arithmetic; we may make the whole week sabbatic by
Christian consecration. There will always be ordinances, because while
man is in the body he needs external helps, collateral assistances and
auxiliaries. He is not always equally awake; he is not always equally
spiritual. He needs the communion of saints, the coming together in holy
fellowship, all the associations of a sacred time and a sacred place, and
through the active yet subtle ministry of these he comes to feel that he
is in touch with God. “Here in the body pent” we need such aids as can
penetrate our prison and minister to the liberty of the soul.

Now Abijah says, as a kind of climax:

“And, behold, God himself is with us for our captain, and His priests
with sounding trumpets to cry alarm against you. O children of Israel,
fight ye not against the Lord God of your fathers; for ye shall not
prosper.”

How steadfastly Abijah abides by the altar! He can not be tempted
one step from the throne of God. His appeal is sublime because it is
religious. It is historically religious. “The Lord God of your fathers.”
It would seem to be a solemn thing to cut off oneself from all the
currents of history--to bury our fathers over again in a deeper grave;
yea, to bury them at night-time, so that when the morning came we could
not tell where they were interred.

Abijah will have a historic line. He maintains the doctrine of
philosophic and personal heredity and organic unity. He will insist upon
it that the men of his day represented the men of dead generations, and
were to do what they would have done had they then lived. Not only was it
historically religious, but it was religion accentuated by motives, such
as act most powerfully upon human conduct--“for ye shall not prosper.”
That appeal they could understand.

The double appeal constitutes God’s address to men. He is bound to point
out consequences, though He would not have life built upon them. There
is no other way of getting at certain people than by telling them that
if they believe not they shall be damned. They are so curiously and
fearfully made that only hell can excite their attention. The preacher
does not declare this doctrine of fire, or mere penalty, for the sake of
revealing God and acting upon human thought and conduct. He knows it is
an appeal more or less tinctured with possible selfishness. He can not
but despise the man who asks for Heaven simply because he has smelt the
fire of hell.

But the Christian preacher will begin where he can. He has to do with
all classes and conditions of men. All men do not occupy the highest
point of thought--do not approach the Kingdom of Heaven from the noblest
considerations--and he is the wise pastor, he has the great shepherd
heart, who receives men by night, by day, through the gate of fear,
through the portals of love; who keeps the door ajar for men, not knowing
when they may come home.

He is but a poor preacher, and he knows it, who bids people come to God
that they may get to Heaven; but he is aware that some people can only
understand through the medium of such terms, if ever; and he really hopes
for them that by experience they may eventually rise to a nobler level,
and desire God for God’s own sake. He only is in the Spirit of Christ who
would pray as much, give as much, suffer as much, if he knew he had to
die this night, and be blotted out for ever, as he would do and give if
he knew he were this night going into everlasting glory.

To be good in order to buy Heaven is not to be good. To be religious in
order to escape hell is not to be religious.

Yet we must always so judge human nature as to provide for people who
can only act through fear, and through love and hope of reward. Their
education will be continued and completed, and some day they will look
back upon their infantile beginning and pity themselves.

The great thing, however, is to begin. If we are afraid of hell, let us
ask great questions. If we are in hope of Heaven, let us begin to do
great services. Hell and Heaven have nothing to do with it in reality,
but they have to do a great deal with it initially, instrumentally and
educationally.

What was the upshot of the war? Who needs to inquire? When Omnipotence
goes forth to war, what can be the issue of the battle? God takes out His
glittering sword, and His hand lays heavy in judgment; can grasshoppers
stand before Him? Oppose a wooden fence to a boundless conflagration, and
you may act almost rationally--most rationally--as compared with those
who set a grasshopper to oppose the march of God.

The writer in the Book of Kings takes a much worse view of Abijah’s
character than we find in the Book of Chronicles. From the first Book of
Kings we learn that Abijah endeavored to recover the kingdom of the Ten
Tribes, and made war on Jeroboam. No details are given, but we are also
informed that he walked in all the sins of Rehoboam--idolatry and its
attendant immoralities--and that his heart “was not perfect before God,
as the heart of David, his father.”

In the second Book of Chronicles Abijah’s war upon Jeroboam is more
minutely described, and he makes a speech to the men of Israel,
reproaching them for breaking their allegiance to the house of David,
for worshiping the golden calves, and substituting unauthorized priests
for the sons of Aaron and the Levites. He was successful in the battle
against Jeroboam, and took the cities of Bethel, Jeshanah and Ephraim,
with their dependent villages. Nothing is said by the writer in
Chronicles of the sins of Abijah, but we are told that after his victory
he “waxed mighty, and married fourteen wives”--whence we may well infer
that he was elated with prosperity, and like Solomon, his grandfather,
fell during the last two years of his life into wickedness, as described
in Kings. Both records inform us that he reigned only for the period of
three years.


AHAB.

God is the time-keeper. He says: “Now.” We wonder we can not go just when
it is convenient to ourselves. We think we see the exact juncture when it
would be right to go, but if we went just then a serpent would bite us on
the road.

We want to go to Heaven, but God says: “Not yet.”

We want to begin the battle, but God says: “Wait.”

In the eighteenth chapter of the first Book of Kings we read:

“And it came to pass, after many days, that the word of the Lord came to
Elijah in the third year, saying: ‘Go, show thyself unto Ahab; and I will
send rain upon the Earth.’ And Elijah went to show himself unto Ahab. And
there was a sore famine in Samaria.”

Think of waiting “many days” and doing nothing! But what if waiting be
the best working? What if we can best do every thing by simply doing
nothing? There is a time to stand still and see the salvation of God.

Mark another thing in these verses. The Lord said “Go,” and Elijah went.
Not Elijah “objected,” Elijah “reasoned,” or Elijah “pointed out the
difficulties,” but simply Elijah “went.”

That is the true ideal of life.

Always be ready.

Contrast with this the case of Jonah. Elijah had no fear of Ahab. He
who fears God can not fear man. If you go up to your duties in your own
strength, you will find them difficult; if you come down upon them from
high communion with God, you will find them easy.

The governor of the house of Ahab was called Obadiah. The word Obadiah
means “servant of Jehovah,” and it would seem to have been a true
description of the man, for we read that “Obadiah feared [or reverenced]
the Lord greatly.”

It is possible for a man to be very bad in one direction and very
tolerant in another. It was so in the case of Ahab. He was the worst of
the kings of Israel, yet he kept a governor over his house who feared
the Lord greatly.

The Lord causes the most wicked men to pay His religion the homage
which is due to its excellence. A bad king employs a good governor. He
who himself disobeys Jehovah yet engages a servant who fears the Lord
greatly. The thief likes an honest man for steward. The blasphemer
likes a godly teacher for his child. The great speculator prefers an
unspeculative man for book-keeper. It is thus that virtue has many
unconscious votaries.

He who is the slave of idolatry becomes an easy prey to the power of
cruel tempters. We do not know that Ahab was a cruel man, but we do
know that Jezebel was a cruel woman, and Ahab was greatly influenced by
his passionate and sanguinary wife. Ahab’s provocation of the Lord may
have been in the direction of idolatry alone; but to be wrong in your
conception of worship is to expose yourself to every possible attack of
the enemy. To pray in the wrong direction is to be weak in every other.

Ahab was a speculative idolater; Jezebel was a practical persecutor. Ahab
showed that speculative error is consistent with social toleration. You
must distinguish between Ahab and Elijah in this matter. It was Jezebel
who slew the prophets of the Lord, and Ahab knew that his servant,
Obadiah, had hidden fifty of these prophets in a cave; and yet Ahab kept
Obadiah in his service. But redeeming points do not restore the whole
character. “One swallow does not make a Summer.”

In the same character may be met great faith and great doubt. Obadiah
risked his life to save fifty of the prophets of the Lord, yet dare not
risk it, without first receiving an oath, for the greatest prophet of
all! This mixture we find in every human character. “How abject, how
august, is man!”

In Ahab, Obadiah, Elijah and Jezebel we see a fourfold type of human
society. There is the speculator, the godly servant, the far-seeing
prophet and the cruel persecutor.

Society has got no farther than this today. The Ahabs of the age are
leading us away into speculation that ends in idolatry and in infinite
provocation of the Lord; the Obadiahs of the age are still praying, and
serving God, and saving even the worst households from the wrath of
Heaven; the Elijahs of the age are still hurling their divine thunders
through the corrupt and stagnant air, and piercing with lightning shafts
the gloomy and threatening future; and the Jezebels of the age are still
narrow, bitter, indignant, vengeful and sanguinary.

O wondrous combination! So checked, so controlled, by invisible but
benignant power! Speculative error has its counterpart in actual cruelty,
and patient worship has its counterpart in daring service.

We sometimes hear that Ahab was a covetous man. Are we quite sure that
the charge is just and that it can be substantiated?

This charge is based on the affair of Naboth’s vineyard. How could Ahab
be covetous? He proposed terms, saying:

“Give me thy vineyard, that I may have it for a garden of herbs, because
it is near unto my house, and I will give thee a better vineyard than it;
or, if it seems good to thee, I will give thee the worth of it in money.”

The terms do not, upon the face of them, appear to be unreasonable or
inapplicable. Surely this is not mere covetousness, if covetousness at
all. The vineyard was close to the palace, and that fact was assigned
as a reason for wishing to open negotiations concerning its transfer.
But do we not sometimes too narrowly interpret the word covetousness? It
is generally, at least, limited to money. When a man is fond of money,
wishes to add to it, and is not scrupulous as to the means by which he
seeks to enhance his fortune, we describe him as covetous. The term is
perfectly applicable in such a case.

But the term “covetous” may apply to a much larger set of circumstances,
and describe quite another set of impulses and desires.

We may even be covetous of personal appearance; we may be covetous of
popular fame, such as is enjoyed by other men; we may be covetous in
every direction which implies the gratification of our own wishes; and
yet, with regard to the mere matter of money, we may be almost liberal.

This is an astounding state of affairs.

A man may be liberal with money, and yet covetous in many other
directions. Sometimes, when covetousness takes this other turn, we
describe it by the narrower word, “envy.” We say we envy the personal
appearance of some; we envy the greatness and the public standing of
others.

But under all this envy is covetousness.

Envy is in a sense but a symptom; covetousness is the vital and devouring
disease. Under this interpretation of the term, therefore, it is not
unfit or unjust to describe Ahab as a covetous man.

Look at his dissatisfaction with circumstances. He wishes to have “a
garden of herbs.” That is all. He is king of Israel in Samaria; but there
is one little thing of which he has not yet possessed himself, and until
he gets that in his hand he can not rest well. There is a dream that
troubles him; there is a nightmare which makes him afraid to lie down to
sleep.

Look at what he has. Who can measure it? Who can run through the
enumeration of his possessions? Who can take an exhaustive inventory of
all the riches of the king of Israel?

But there is one little corner that is not his, and he wants it, and
until he can get it all the rest goes for nothing.

The great Alexander could not rest in his palace at Babylon because
he could not get ivy to grow in his garden. What was Babylon, or all
Assyria, in view of the fact that this childish king could not cause ivy
to grow in the palace gardens?

Ahab lived in circumstances; he lived in the very narrowest kind of
circumstances. As a little man, he lived in little things, and because
those things were not all to his mind it was impossible for him to be
restful or noble or really good.

Once let the mind become dissatisfied with some trifling circumstance,
and that fly spoils the whole pot of ointment. Once get the notion that
the house is too small, and then morning, noon and night you never see
a picture that is in it, or acknowledge the comfort of one corner in
all the little habitation. The one thing that is present in the mind
throughout all the weary hours is that the house is too small.

Once get the idea that the business is undignified, and you go to it late
in the morning and leave it early in the afternoon, neglecting it between
times; you are also ashamed to speak of it, and will not throw your whole
heart and soul during business hours into its execution.

Once get the notion that the neighborhood is unfashionable, and it goes
for nothing that the rooms are large and airy, that the garden is one of
the best you ever had, that there is ample scope for a rich library, that
all the neighbors are men of peculiar intelligence and goodness. All go
for nothing, because the tempter has said: “This neighborhood is not a
fashionable quarter of the town, and when people come to know that you
are living here they will lose confidence in you and respect for you.”

If we live in circumstances, we shall be the sport of events; we shall
be without dignity, without calmness, without reality and solidity of
character. Let us, therefore, betake ourselves into inner thoughts, into
spirituality of life, into the soul’s true character, into the very
sanctuary of God. There we shall have truth and light and peace; there
the stormy wind can not disturb us, and the great darkness is but an
outside circumstance, for within there is the shining of the light of God.

Then notice in Ahab a childish servility to circumstances.

[Illustration: THE PROPHET AMOS.

From the Painting by Gustave Dore.]

[Illustration: THE DESPAIR OF JUDAS.

From a Photograph of the Character in the Passion Play.]

“Ahab came into his house heavy and displeased … and he laid him down
upon his bed, and turned away his face, and would eat no bread.”

Yet he was the king of Israel in Samaria! He actually had subjects under
him. He was in reality a man who could give law, whose very look was a
commandment, and the uplifting of his hand could move an army. Now we see
him surely at his least. So we do, but not at his worst.

All this must have an explanation. We can not imagine that the man is so
simply childish and foolish as this incident alone would describe him.
Behind all this childishness there is an explanation. What is it?

We find it in the twenty-fifth verse:

“But there was none like unto Ahab, which did sell himself to work
wickedness in the sight of the Lord, whom Jezebel, his wife, stirred up.”

That explains the whole mystery. The man had sold himself to the devil.
And men are doing that self-same thing every day.

If it were a transaction in the market place--if the auctioneer were
visibly interested in this affair, if he could call out in audible tones
“So much is the price, and the man is about to take it,” people would
shrink from the villainous transaction.

But this is an affair which does not take place in the open market or in
the open daylight. It is not conducted in words. If the men involved in
such transactions could speak the words, the very speech of the words
might break the spell and destroy the horrible infatuation. But the
compact is made in darkness, in silence, in out-of-the-way places. It is
an understanding unwritten, rather than an agreement in detail signed
in the presence of witnesses. It is a mystery which the heart alone can
understand, which even the preacher can not explain in terms, but he can
only throw himself upon his own consciousness, and throw others upon
their consciousness, and call for a united testimony to the fact that it
is possible to sell one’s very soul to evil.

Now we understand King Ahab better. We thought him but little, frivolous
of mind, childish and petty, without a man’s worthy ambition; but now we
see that all this was only symptomatic, an outward sign, pointing, when
rightly followed, to an inward and mortal corruption.

Now, let us look at the case of Naboth and the position which he occupied
in this matter.

Naboth possessed the vineyard which Ahab is said to have coveted. Naboth
said: “The Lord forbid.” He made a religious question of it. Why did he
invoke the Eternal Name and stand back, as if an offense had been offered
to his faith? The terms were commercial; the terms were not unreasonable;
the approach was courteous, and the ground given for the approach was not
an unnatural ground. Why did Naboth stand back as if his religion had
been shocked?

The answer is in the Book of Numbers, thirty-sixth chapter and seventh
verse:

“So shall not the inheritance of the children of Israel remove from tribe
to tribe; for every one of the children of Israel shall keep himself to
the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers.”

So Naboth stood upon the law.

In Ezekiel we read:

“Moreover, the prince shall not take of the people’s inheritance by
oppression, to thrust them out of their possession; but he shall give
his sons inheritance out of his own possession, that My people be not
scattered every man from his possession.”

So Naboth was not answering haughtily or resentfully. He was answering
both solemnly and religiously. When money was offered for his fathers’
inheritance, he spurned the offer. There are some things, blessed be God,
we can not pay for.

When Ahab said “I will give thee for it a better vineyard than it” he
knew not of what he was speaking. There can be no better vineyard than
the vineyard of the fathers; there can be no vineyard equal to the
vineyard that is sown with history, planted with associations, solemnized
and endeared by a thousand precious memories. There ought to be some
things which we can not barter. Surely there ought to be some things
which we should never try to sell.

Verily, when we hear propositions made to us that money shall be given
in exchange for certain things, our whole soul should rise in horror and
indignation, and repel the approach of a barter which itself expresses an
infinite, because a most spiritual, injustice. So Naboth’s position was
strong, and he had the courage to answer the king in these terms.

Kings must submit to law. Kings ought to be the subjects of their own
people. Ahab was taught that there was a man in Samaria who valued the
inheritance which had been handed down to him. Have we no inheritance
handed down to us--no book of revelation, no day of rest, no flag of
liberty, no password of common trust? Do we inherit nothing? Did we make
the age as it is, and is civilization a creature of our own fashioning?
And are we not bound to hand on to others what was handed to us intact
and unpolluted?

Let us live in a sacred past, and regard ourselves as trustees of many
possessions, and only trustees, and as bound to vindicate our trust and
have an ample acquittal at the last.

So Ahab lay down upon his bed, turned away his face, and would eat no
bread. But there is a way of accomplishing mean desires. There is a way
of obtaining what we want. Take heart! There is a way of possessing
oneself of almost whatever one desires. There is always some Merlin who
will bring every Uther-Pendragon what he longs to have; there is always
some Lady Macbeth who will show the thane how to become king. There
is always a way to be bad. The gate of hell stands wide open; or, if
apparently half closed, a touch will make it fly back, and the road is
broad that leads to destruction.

Jezebel said she would find the garden or vineyard for her husband. She
taunted him. “Dost thou now govern the kingdom of Israel? Arise and eat
bread, and let thine heart be merry. I will give thee the vineyard of
Naboth, the Jezreelite.” Jezebel threw into the word “govern” a subtle
and significant emphasis.

How will she proceed? She will be ceremoniously religious; she will
proclaim a fast. O thou sweet, white, pure religion, thou hast been
forced into strange uses! “Proclaim a fast;” lengthen your faces; mimic
solemnity; promise your hunger an early satisfaction, but look as if you
were fasting.

It is a sure sign of mischief when certain men become serious. The moment
they appear to be religious the devil is just adding the last touch to
the building which he has been putting up within their souls. When they
talk long words--when they speak about responsibility, obligation, duty,
conscience, compulsion of conviction--they are walking over tesselated
pavement into the very jaws of hell.

They do not mean their words; they do but use them. “The heart is
deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked.”

First of all, then, be ceremoniously religious, Jezebel; then trample
down truth. “Set two men, sons of Belial, before him, to bear witness
against him, saying: ‘Thou didst blaspheme God and the king.’” Falsehood
is always ready. A great black lie is always willing to be loosed and to
be set going in the minds of men to pervert them and mislead them. It is
always open to the bad heart to speak the untrue word. Nor is the untrue
word always frankly and broadly spoken. If so, it could be answered in
some cases.

The false word is hardly spoken at all; it is uttered in a whisper.
Falsehood is made to use signs and gestures; even silence is made to bear
witness to falsehood. Truly, again we may say: “The heart is deceitful
above all things, and desperately wicked.” Tell a lie big enough about
any man, and it will be difficult, if not impossible, to do away with
the consequences of the false accusation. People will always be found
to say: “There must be something in it; it may not be just as rumor has
it, but surely a statement of that kind never could have been invented.
Allowing a good deal for exaggeration, there must be something in it.”

Nor is it always possible to get even righteous men to purge their minds
of that damnable sophism. Men who ought to stand up and say “There is
nothing in it” hang down their heads, and with a coward’s gesture let the
lie pass on.

This is how men insult the Son of God, and crucify the Man of truth. They
will not be thorough, bold and fearless, and make the enemy ashamed of
himself for either having invented or repeated a falsehood. Nor may the
man escape because he says he heard the lie. Tell him he may have heard
it, but he is yet responsible for repeating it. He may have no control
over the hearing, but the moment he repeats it he adopts it, and renders
himself amenable to the Eternal Righteousness.

Make the very law an instrument of injustice! First charge this man with
blasphemy and treason, and then take him out and stone him, that he may
die! Do not give him time to speak; do not ask for his defense; do not
give him an opportunity of interrogating the witnesses. But who would
cross-examine two “sons of Belial?” Better almost to die than to taint
the hands and eyes with the touch and look of such children of blackness!

“Then they carried him [Naboth] forth out of the city, and stoned him
with stones, that he died.” It is all over! Jezebel did this. Jezebel--a
woman, a king’s wife--did this. High position goes for nothing when the
heart is wrong. Great influence means great mischief when the soul is not
in harmony with the spirit of righteousness.

Is Naboth quite dead? Yes, he is dead. Take the vineyard--take possession
of it instantly. Now grow herbs, and grow them plentifully. The vineyard
is now at liberty--take it. “Ahab rose up to go down to the vineyard of
Naboth, the Jezreelite, to take possession of it.” But who is that looms
in the distance? Is it Naboth? No.

How comes this man to be here just now--aye, just now? How the end
is marked off into points, and how does providence reveal itself at
unexpected times and in ways unforeseen! Who is this? He looks stern. He
has an eye of fire. His lips are shut as if they could never be opened.
He does but look.

Who is he? “Elijah, the Tishbite.” He has a message:

“Thus saith the Lord: ‘Hast thou killed, and also taken possession?’ …
Thus saith the Lord: ‘In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth
shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine.’”

A sad walk!

Ahab went down to take possession of a vineyard, and a death warrant was
read to him! After all, it is safe to live in this universe; there is law
in it, there is a genius of righteousness, there is a Force that moves on
toward noble issues.

“And Ahab said to Elijah: ‘Hast thou found me, O mine enemy?’ And
he answered: ‘I have found thee; because thou hast sold thyself
to work evil in the sight of the Lord.’” Ahab went out to take
possession of a garden of herbs, and there he stands face to face with
righteousness--face to face with honor--face to face with judgment.

Now take the vineyard. He can not! An hour since the Sun shone upon it,
and now it is black as if it were part of the midnight which has gathered
in judgment.

There is a success which is failure. We can not take some prizes. Elijah
will not allow us. When we see him we would that a way might open under
our feet that we might flee and escape the judgment of his silent look.

In the Septuagint version the twentieth chapter of the first Book of
Kings immediately precedes the twenty-second. The three years without war
is a period which is reckoned from the peace which was so rashly made by
Ahab with Ben-hadad.

It is clear that Ben-hadad has recovered his independence, and is
probably in a position of superiority. It is certain that he has not
restored Ramoth-gilead, as he had promised to do, and his reconstructed
army now seems to him to be sufficient to encounter successfully the
united hosts of Israel and Judah. In the forty-second verse of the same
chapter we have seen how Ahab was rebuked for allowing the enemy to
escape.

It has been supposed that this conduct on the part of Ahab may have been
due partly to compassion and partly to weakness. The judgment of the Lord
was, however, expressed in the severest terms:

“Because thou hast let go out of thy hand a man whom I appointed to
utter destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his life, and thy
people for his people.”

In the third verse we see these words signally fulfilled. The king of
Israel seems to have a good cause when he said to his servants: “Know ye
that Ramoth, in Gilead, is ours, and we be still, and take it not out of
the hand of the king of Syria?” On this occasion Ahab entered into an
alliance with Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, for the purpose of taking back
the city which belonged to Israel. Jehoshaphat made a deferential as well
as a friendly reply, but insisted upon the fulfillment of a religious
condition. Jehoshaphat would make inquiry at the word of the Lord.

Thereupon four hundred prophets were gathered together, and with one
consent they advised that the attack should be made upon Ramoth-gilead.
Surely this was enough to satisfy the judgment and the conscience of the
most religious man, yet Jehoshaphat was not content with the unanimous
reply which four hundred prophets had returned.

“There is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth
them understanding.”

All external unanimity goes for nothing when the conscience itself
dissents from the judgment which has been pronounced. There is a
verifying faculty which operates upon its own responsibility, and which
can not be overpowered by the clamor of multitudes who eagerly rush down
paths that are forbidden. Even when imagination assents to the voice
of the majority, and when ambition is delighted with the verdict of
the prophets, there yet remains the terrible but gracious authority of
conscience. Through all the clamor that authority makes its way, and
calmly distinguishes between right and wrong, and solemnly insists that
right shall be done at all hazards and in view of all consequences.

A vital lesson rises here to all who are anxious to know the right way
under difficult circumstances. It is not enough to have great numbers of
authorities on our side; so long as the conscience remains unsatisfied
all other authorities are “trifles light as air.”

Jehoshaphat was uneasy, therefore, notwithstanding the prophets had said:
“Go up; for the Lord shall deliver it into the hand of the king.” He
inquired: “Is there not here a prophet of the Lord besides, that we might
inquire of him?” The word which Jehoshaphat used was the great word,
Jehovah. It was not enough for him to use a religious or sacred term. He
must have the prophecy identified with the awful name, Jehovah; then it
would come with final authority.

The king of Israel knew that there was another man whose very name
signified “Who is like Jehovah?” Ahab frankly admitted that he hated
Micaiah because he never prophesied good concerning him, but always evil.

Observe the madness of Ahab’s policy, and note how often it is the policy
which we ourselves are tempted to pursue. We suppose that if we do not
consult the Bible we may take license to do what seems good in our own
eyes, and we imagine that by ignoring the Bible we have divested it of
authority. We flatter ourselves that if we do not listen to an exposition
of the divine word we shall be judged according to the light we have,
forgetting the solemn law that it is not according to the light we have
that we are to be judged, but according to the light we might have if we
put ourselves in right relations to the opportunities created for us by
divine providence.

We know that if we go to hear a certain preacher he will insist upon
“righteousness, temperance and judgment to come;” and, supposing that
we already know every thing that he will say, we turn away from him and
listen to men who do not profoundly treat vital subjects, or press home
upon the conscience the terrible judgments of God.

What is this but closing our eyes to light, and supposing that darkness
is safety? What is this ostrich policy but one that ought to be condemned
by our sense as well as shrunk from by our piety?

Our duty under all critical circumstances is to go to the truth-teller,
and to get at the reality of things at all costs. Where the truth-teller
disturbs our peace and disappoints our ambition, we ought surely
to learn that it is precisely at that point that we have to become
self-rectifying. The truth-teller is only powerful in proportion as he
tells the truth. Officially, he is nothing; his power is simply the
measure of his righteousness.

But do not men love to be flattered, even in courses of evil? Is it
not pleasant to go to forbidden war amid the huzzas of thoughtless and
irresponsible multitudes?

Jehoshaphat, however, was a just man, and as such he protested against
the sin of the king of Israel, saying: “Let not the king say so.”
Jehoshaphat being so bent upon a complete judgment of the case, Micaiah
was sent for. The king of Israel wished to overawe the despised prophet
by the pomp and circumstance under which he was introduced to the royal
presence. “The king of Israel and Jehoshaphat, the king of Judah, sat
each on his throne, having put on their robes, in a void place in the
entrance of the gate of Samaria,” and, to increase the impressiveness of
the occasion, all the prophets prophesied before the kings.

A singular addition was made to the surroundings of the occasion which
was intended to impress the imagination and stagger the courage of the
despised Micaiah. A man bearing the name of Zedekiah (“righteousness of
Jehovah”) made him horns of iron. The use of symbolical acts is quite
common in biblical history. We have already seen Abijah engaged in acts
of this kind. He “caught the new garment that was on him and rent it in
twelve pieces, and said to Jeroboam: ‘Take thee ten pieces.’”

The enthusiasm of Zedekiah inflamed all the other prophets to the highest
point of excitement, and they shouted as with one voice:

“Go up to Ramoth-gilead, and prosper; for the Lord shall deliver it into
the king’s hand.”

In this instance the prophets, overborne by the enthusiasm of Zedekiah,
actually ventured to use the name of Jehovah, which had not been used in
the first instance. The excitement had passed the point of worship and
had become more nearly resembling the frantic cry that was heard on Mount
Carmel: “O Baal, hear us.”

Is it possible that there can be found any solitary man who dare oppose
such unanimous testimony and complete enthusiasm?

The messenger who was sent to call Micaiah was evidently a man of
considerate feeling and who wished the prophet well. Seeing that the
words of the prophets had all declared good unto the king with one mouth,
the messenger wished that Micaiah should for once agree with the other
prophets, and please the king by leaving undisturbed their emphatic and
unanimous counsel.

Thus the voice of persuasion was brought to bear on Micaiah, and that
voice is always the most difficult to resist. The temptation thus
addressed to Micaiah was thus double in force. On the one hand, there
were the pomp and the terror of the king who had sold himself to do evil,
and who would shrink from the infliction of no cruelty that would express
his unreasoning and unlimited anger; on the other hand, there was the
good will of the messenger, who wished Micaiah to escape all danger and
penalty, and for once to take the popular side. Micaiah’s reply is simply
sublime: “As the Lord liveth, what the Lord saith unto me, that will I
speak.”

The humility of this answer is as conspicuous as its firmness. Its
profound religiousness saves it from the charge of being defiant. Micaiah
recognizes himself merely in the position of a servant or medium, who has
nothing of his own to say; who is not called upon to invent an answer or
to play the clever man in the presence of the kings. He was simply as a
trumpet through which God could blow His own blast, or a pillar on which
God would inscribe his own message, or a voice which God would use for
the declaration of His own will. It is unjust to attribute obstinacy or
any form of self-will or self-worship to Micaiah. If he had consulted his
natural inclination alone, he would have sought favor with the king, and
the logical effect of his subsequent position would have been that Ahab
would have endeavored for ever to silence him by constituting him the
prince and leader of the four hundred prophets. Micaiah said, in effect,
what was said centuries afterward: “We have this treasure in earthen
vessels.”

Micaiah lived in God, for God, and had nothing of his own to calculate
or consider. Until preachers realize this same spiritual independence,
they will be attempting to accommodate themselves to the spirit of the
times, and even the strongest of them may be betrayed into connivances
and compromises fatal to personal integrity and to the claims of truth.

Now came the critical moment. Now it was to be seen whether Micaiah was
to be promoted to honor, or thrust away in contempt and wrath. It is
easy to read of the recurrence of such moments, but difficult to realize
them in their agony. Yet these are the moments which make history in its
sublimest lines.

It is not too much to say that there have been points of time at which
if certain men had given way the whole economy of the world have been
wrecked.

The king addressed himself to the prophet, saying: “Shall we go against
Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall we forbear?” The answer of Micaiah must
have been a surprise to all who heard it, for he said: “Go, and prosper;
for the Lord shall deliver it into the hand of the king.”

This is an answer which can not be understood in print. It was evident,
however, that Ahab was in no doubt as to its meaning, for the tone of
the prophet was a tone of almost contemptuous irony. If King Ahab had
taken Micaiah’s literal answer, he would have gone forth to the battle
comforting himself with the thought that he was carrying out the will of
Heaven; but he knew in his own soul that Micaiah was not uttering that
which expressed the reality of the case. With anger the king said unto
him: “How many times shall I adjure thee that thou tell me nothing but
that which is true in the name of the Lord?”

Then Micaiah replied in symbolic language, the full meaning of which was
vividly clear to the mind of Ahab; for, turning to Jehoshaphat, he said:
“Did I not tell thee that he would prophesy no good concerning me, but
evil?”

Thereupon Micaiah charged the whole band of prophets with being under
the inspiration of a lying spirit, and thus he put a stigma upon their
judgment and extracted from it every particle of dignity and authority.

But this was not to be borne, for Zedekiah went near and smote Micaiah on
the cheek and taunted him as being the only prophet in Israel. Micaiah
had to bear the sarcasm conveyed in the inquiry: “Which way went the
Spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto thee?”

Micaiah, like a true prophet, leaves his judgment to the decision of
time. He will not stoop to argue, or to exchange words either of anger or
of controversy; he simply says that Zedekiah will one day see the meaning
of the whole prophecy, and until that day controversy would be useless.

Micaiah had to pay for his intrepidity. He was carried unto Amon, the
governor of the city, and to Joash, the king’s son, and was to be put
in prison and fed with the bread of affliction and with the water of
affliction until Ahab returned in peace.

Micaiah thus disappears from history. Of his fate we know nothing; but
there can be no difficulty in forecasting it a cruel death. Micaiah knew
well the meaning of the king’s message. It may be difficult for the
commentator to explain the expression, “bread of affliction and water of
affliction,” but Micaiah knew the full meaning of the terms, and yet,
while their cruel sound was in his ears, he looked at the king and said:
“If thou return at all in peace, the Lord hath not spoken by me.”

Micaiah also made his appeal to the people, and thus committed himself to
the verdict of history, saying: “Hearken, O people, every one of you.”

See whether it is not a moment to be proud of when Micaiah turns away
in the custody of his persecutors, having delivered his soul with a
fearlessness that did not cower or blanche, even at the sight of death
in its most ghastly form. Surely, it is due to history to recognize the
fact that there have been men who have not counted their lives dear unto
themselves when they were called upon to testify for truth and goodness.

The martyrs must never be forgotten.

[Illustration: JOSEPH INTERPRETING PHARAOH’S DREAM. Genesis, xli.]

[Illustration: St. Paul.

From the Painting by Raphael.]

Dark will be the day in the history of any nation when the men who shed
their blood that truth might be told and honor might be vindicated are
no longer held in remembrance. In vain do we bring forth from our hidden
treasure the coins of ancient times, the robes worn in high antiquity by
kings and priests, the rusty armor of warriors, if there is no longer in
our heart the most tender recollection of the men who wandered about
clad in sheep-skins and goat-skins--being destitute, afflicted and
tormented--that they might save the torch of truth from extinction and
the standard of honor from overthrow.

Away the kings have gone, and instead of relying upon the word of the
Lord, or taking refuge in the sanctuary of great principles, they invent
little tricks for the surprise and dismay of the enemy.

The king of Israel disguised himself, and Jehoshaphat made himself as the
king of Israel; but all their inventions came to nothing. A certain man
drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of Israel between the joints
of the harness. The poor king was fatally struck. He “was stayed up his
chariot against the Syrians, and died at even; and the blood ran out of
the wound into the midst of the chariot.… And one washed the chariot in
the pool of Samaria; and the dogs licked up his blood; and they washed
his armor; according unto the word of the Lord which He spake.”

So will perish all the enemies of the Lord.

Differences of merely accidental detail there will ever be, but no honor
can mark the death of those who have gone contrary to the will of Heaven,
and taken counsel of their own imagination. How long shall the lessons of
history be wasted upon us? How long will men delude themselves with the
mad infatuation that they can fight against God and prosper? Horsemen and
chariots are nothing; gold and silver are valueless; all the resources of
civilization are but an elaborate display of cobwebs. Nothing can stand
in the final conflict but truth, right and purity. These are the eternal
bulwarks, and unto these are assured complete and unchangeable victory.
If God be for us, who can be against us? And if God be against us, it
will matter not what kings are for us; they shall be blown away by the
wind as if contemptuously, and cast out as refuse which is of no value.

My soul, be thou faithful to the voice of history, nor tell lies to
thyself, nor operate merely through imagination, ambition or selfish
calculation; for the end of this course is death--not heroic death, not
death over which coming men and women will weep, but death that shall be
associated with dishonor, a thing to be forgotten, an event never to be
named without bitterness and shame.

The first and second Book of Kings constitute a section of Jewish
history, and originally formed only one book in the sacred writings. It
was customary with the Jews to name the sacred books from the word or
words with which they commenced; and, while this practice may have given
rise to the designation, “Kings,” it is right to observe that the title
is well fitted to indicate the character of these historic compositions.

The annals given in these sacred registers are necessarily brief; but
they extend from the close of David’s reign till the commonwealth was
dissolved, a period of 427 years. Succinct as is the history contained
in these books, there are some peculiarities in them which should not
be overlooked, and from which not a little may be learned. There is not
here a simple biography of the various kings that occupied the thrones
of Judah and Israel, nor is there a mere detail of national movements
and events, nor even a tabular register of ecclesiastical affairs. The
throne, the state and the church are all exhibited in their mutual
relations and bearings upon each other. Kings and people are held up to
view as existing and acting under the immediate government of God; and
hence the character of the ruler is always tested by the mode in which he
adheres to the laws of the Most High and develops the moral excellences
of the people. The notice of his accession to royal office is generally
accompanied with an estimate of his conduct, and the standard to which
he is likened or with which he is contrasted is either the character of
David, of his own father or of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, “who made
Israel to sin.”

All the political events which are recorded have been brought forward
chiefly to exhibit the influence of religion on national prosperity, and
in this way to show how the divine King of Israel observed the conduct
of his subjects, and rewarded their fidelity or avenged their wickedness
with expressions of righteous indignation. And the affairs of the Church
are all portrayed with the evident design of giving prominence to the
same important truth.

Idolatry in Israel was treason against their King; religious defection
was open revolt, and every act of overt wickedness was an act of
rebellion. Hence there is a constant comparing or contrasting of
religious state and feeling with those of former times, and especially
are the oracles of truth continually elevated as the perfect standard to
which the thoughts and actions of all should be conformed.

The Mosaic promises and warnings are strikingly verified in the Books of
Kings. For this object they were written, and to the manifestation of
this the author has made his whole narrative conduce.

Much variety of opinion exists with reference to the author of these
records and the period of their composition. Jewish tradition ascribes
the authorship of the treatise to Jeremiah, the prophet--a supposition
which is greatly strengthened by the similarity of style and idiom which
is traceable between the language of the Books of Kings and that of
Jeremiah.


AHAZIAH.

Ahaziah was the son of Ahab and Jezebel. He was badly born. Some
allowance must be made for this fact in estimating his character.

Again and again we have had occasion, and shall indeed often have, to
remark upon the disadvantages of children born of wicked parents. It is
not for us to lay down any final doctrine of responsibility; we must
leave that in the hands of a just and gracious God.

A terrible spectacle, however, it is to see a man whose father sold
himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord, who bound himself as
for a price to show rebellion on the very floor of Heaven.

Ahaziah was a prince of evil--a man who said he would defile the
sanctuary and commit his supreme sin within the shadow of the altar,
and whose mother laid the plans for the murder of Naboth, and who all
but personally superintended their execution. What can we expect from
such a child of darkness? Who can gather grapes of thorns, or figs of
thistles? Was he responsible for his own actions? Society is often hard
on such men--not unreasonably or unnaturally. Yet society is often very
gracious to such men, saying with an instinctive piety and sense of
justice: “After all, such men are not to be personally blamed for their
antecedents; they may indeed be open to some measure of suspicion, but
even they must have their opportunity in life.”

Let us consider the case of Ahaziah and see how matters stand for our own
instruction.

To understand the matter thoroughly, we must go to the twenty-second
chapter of the first Book of Kings: “Then said Ahaziah, the son of Ahab,
unto Jehoshaphat: ‘Let my servants go with thy servants in the ships.’
But Jehoshaphat would not.”

Jehoshaphat was right when he acted upon his instinct. By-and-by he came
to act upon a basis of calculation, and then a compact was entered into.
But who dare set aside the voice of instinct--the very first voice that
rises in the soul to make judgment and to give direction?

Jehoshaphat, on hearing the proposal of the son of Ahab, said: “No. I
have known thy father too well. I am too familiarly acquainted with thy
family history. Thou shalt not send thy servants with mine.”

It would be well for us if we could sometimes act more promptly upon our
instincts. It would have been well for Jehoshaphat if he had acted upon
his instinct.

Ahaziah fell through the lattice, and in his helplessness he became
religious. Man must have some God. Even Atheism is a kind of religion.
When a man recoils openly from what may be termed the public faith of
his country, he seeks to apologize for his recoil, and to make up for
his church absence by creating high obligations of another class. He
plays the patriot; he plays the disciplinarian; he will be a Spartan in
personal training and drill--in some way he will try to make up for or
defend the recoil of his soul from the old altar of his country.

It is in their helplessness that we really know what men are. Do not
listen to the frivolous and irresponsible chatter of men who, being in
robust health, really know nothing about the aching, the sorrow, the
pain, the need and the agony of this awful human life.

What does our helplessness suggest? Instantly we go out of ourselves to
seek friendship, assistance and sympathy. “Oh, would some gentle hand
but touch my weariness!” Thus cries the helpless one. All that, being
fairly and duly interpreted, has a religious signification. The cry for
friendship is but a subdued cry for God.

Sometimes men will invent Gods of their own. This is what was done,
practically, by Ahaziah. Men will go out after novel deities. This is
what is being done every day--not under that name, but the mere name
makes no difference in the purpose of the spirit. Say new enjoyments, new
entertainments, new programs, new customs--these, being interpreted as to
the heart of them, mean new altars, new helpers, new gods.

It is said of Shakespeare that he first exhausted worlds, and then
invented new. That was right. It was but of the liberty of a poet to
do so. But it is no part of the liberty of the soul. Necessity forbids
it, because the true God cannot be exhausted. He is like His own nature,
so far as we know it in the great creation; He is all things in one,
gleaming and dazzling as noon-tide, soft and gentle as the balmy wind,
strong as the great mountains and rocks, beauteous as the tiny fragrant
flowers, musical as the birds that make the air melodious, awful as the
gathered thunder which hovers above the Earth as if in threatening.

Who can exhaust nature?

Who can exhaust nature’s God?

Still, the imagination of man is evil continually. He will invent new
ways of enjoying himself. He will degrade religion into a mere form of
interrogation. This is what Ahaziah did in this instance: “Go, inquire of
Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron, whether I shall recover of this disease.”
All that we sometimes want of God is that He should be the great fortune
teller.

How true it is that Ahaziah represents us all in making his religion
into a mere form of question asking--in other words, into a form of
selfishness!

The messengers have now come. They have taken their speech from their
king, and they are on the road to consult Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron.
But who is this who meets them, and who asks:

“Is it not because there is not a God in Israel that ye go to inquire of
Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron?”

The men had said nothing about their errand. Who is it that reads the
heart night and day, to whom the darkness and the light are both alike,
and from the fire of whose eye nothing is hid? How do we get the
impression that when we have perfected our lie it is in some sense public
property? We are sure the man whom we meet knows it. He looks as if he
did.

Elijah is an abrupt speaker. The “hairy man” and “girt with a girdle of
leather” did not study the scanning of his sentences. He struck with a
battering ram; his interrogations were spears that quivered in the heart;
his looks were judgments. What an effect he produced upon these men! Why
did they not go past him and say: “Keep thy speeches to thyself, thou
hairy man, nor interfere with the king’s messengers”?

We can not do that. We know that some men are not to be turned away so.
We may attempt to deceive, evade or disappoint them, but they have a
magnetic and most marvelous influence upon us. Though they do not speak
in the imperative mood, they speak with imperative force.

The men turned back like whipped children to tell the king what they had
heard, and Ahaziah was surprised at their early return. He can not sleep.
He asks that the book of the chronicles may be brought, that he may look
up events and see where the loop slipped, where the wrong entry was made,
or where the minutes were not carried out in detail.

All this means that Elijah lives in some form or other and will meet us
and confront us and have it out with us.

Look at the conflict between Ahaziah and Elijah, the Tishbite. Ahaziah is
the king and Elijah is only the prophet, and the king ought to have every
thing his own way ex-officio. Now we shall see what metal Elijah is made
of. He handled kings as if they were little children. He took them up and
set them down behind him and said: “Wait there until I return, and stir
at your peril.”

The prophet should always be the uppermost man. Kings are nothing
compared to teachers and seers--men who hold the judgments of God on
commission. The great men of the nation are the prophets, the teachers,
the educators of thought, the inspirers of noble sacrificial enthusiasm.
See how Elijah tramps among the kings. He has no favor to ask. If he were
driven to ask for one morsel of bread, he would be Elijah no more.

Ahaziah sends to Elijah and says: “Come down.” These words sound very
commanding and imperative. Elijah answered: “If I be a man of God, then
let fire come down from Heaven and consume thee and thy fifty. And there
came down fire from Heaven and consumed him and his fifty.”

Look at the conflict and its parties. On the one hand, petulance; on the
other, dignity. On the one side, anger--fretful, fuming, petty; on the
other, judgment--calm, sublime, comprehensive, final.

Ekron was one of the royal cities of the Philistines. Its situation is
pointed out with considerable minuteness in Scripture. It is described as
lying on the northern border of Philistia and of the territory allotted
to Judah. It stood on the plain between Bethshemesh and Jabneel. Jerome
locates it on the east of the road leading from Azotus (Ashdod) to Jamnia
(Jabneel). From these notices we have no difficulty in identifying it
with the modern village of Akir. Akir stands on the southern slope of
a low and bleak ridge or swell which separates the Plain of Philistia
from Sharon. It contains about fifty mud houses, and has not a vestige of
antiquity except two large and deep wells and some stone water troughs.
Ekron means “wasteness.” The houses are built on the accumulated rubbish
of past ages, and, like their predecessors, if left desolate for a few
years they would crumble to dust. The most interesting event in its
history was the sending of the ark to Bethshemesh. A new cart was made
and two milch kine yoked to it, and then left to choose their own path;
“and they took the straight way to the way of Bethshemesh,” the position
of which can be seen in a gorge of the distant mountains eastward. The
deity worshiped at Ekron was called Baal-zebub, and we may conclude from
the story of Ahaziah that this oracle had a great reputation, even among
the degenerate Israelites. Ekron was a large village in the days of
Jerome, and also in the age of the crusades.


ASA.

Asa was a good king of Judah. He “did that which was good and right in
the eyes of the Lord, his God.” Not only “good and right,” because these
might be variable terms. There are persons who set themselves to the
presumptuous and impious task of settling for themselves what is “right”
and what is “good.”

In the case of Asa, he did not invent a righteousness, nor did he invent
a goodness which he could adapt to his own tempers, ambitions and
conveniences. He was right and good and “did that which was good and
right in the eyes of the Lord, his God.”

While the land had peace, Asa set to work and built walls, towers and
fences, and did all that he could for the good of his country.

Zerah, an Ethiopian warrior, did not understand silence. He mistook
quietness for languor. He made the vulgar mistake of supposing that
quietness was indifference. He did not know that repose is the very
highest expression of power.

Zerah brought against Asa, king of Judah, no fewer than a million
soldiers--to us a large number, but to the Orientals quite a common
array. Zerah’s host was the largest collected army of which we read in
Scripture, but it does not exceed the known numbers of other Oriental
armies in ancient times. Darius Codomannus brought into the field at
Arbela a force of 1,040,000. Xerxes crossed into Greece with certainly
above a million combatants. Artaxerxes Mnemon collected 1,260,000 men to
meet the attack of the younger Cyrus.

What was to be done? Asa did not shrink from war, though he never courted
it. He must meet the foe in battle. Before doing so he must pray.

“Lord, it is nothing with Thee to help, whether with many or with them
that have no power. Help us, O Lord, our God, for we rest on Thee; and in
Thy name we go against this multitude. O Lord, thou art our God; let not
man prevail against Thee.”

Having risen from their knees, they launched themselves against the
Ethiopians, and were mighty as men who answer straw with steel. They
fought in God’s name and for God’s cause, and the thousand thousand of
the Ethiopians were as nothing before the precise and terrific stroke of
men who had studied war in the school of God.

The defeat of Zerah is one of the most remarkable events in the history
of the Jews. On no other occasion did they meet in the field and overcome
the forces of either of the two great monarchies between which they were
placed. It was seldom that they ventured to resist, unless behind walls.
Shishak, Sennacherib, Esarhaddon, Nebuchadnezzar, Alexander and Ptolemy
I. were either unopposed or only opposed in this way. On the other
occasion on which they took the field--which was under Josiah against
Necho--their boldness issued in a most disastrous defeat.

Asa, then, began upon a good foundation; he established himself upon a
great principle. That is what all, young people especially, should take
to heart right seriously. Do not make an accident of your lives--a thing
without center, purpose, certitude or holiness. Be right in your great
foundation lines, and you will build up a superstructure strong, after
the nature and quality of the foundation upon which you build. Do not
snatch at life. Do not take out an odd motto here and there and say:
“This will do for the occasion.” Life should be deeply laid in its bases,
strongly cemented together in its principles, noble in its convictions;
then it can be charitable in its concessions and recognitions.

“And Asa took courage, and put away the abominable idols out of all the
land of Judah and Benjamin, and out of the cities which he had taken
from Mount Ephraim, and renewed the altar of the Lord.”

Let us not trifle with the occasion by suggesting that we have no
idolatries to uproot, no heathen groves to examine, to purify or to
destroy. That would indeed be making light of history and ignoring the
broadest and saddest facts of our present circumstances. The world is
full of little gods, man-made idols, groves planted by human hands,
oppositions and antagonisms to the tried Theism of the universe.

We are apt to think that the idols are a long way off--far beyond seas;
or that they existed long centuries ago and spoke languages now obsolete
or forgotten.

Nothing of the kind. They live here; they build today. Our gods
are a million strong. We do not call them gods, but we worship
them none the less. Luck, Accident, Fortune, Fashion, Popularity,
Self-Indulgence--these are the base progeny of idols that did once
represent some ideal thought and even some transcendental religion.
Idolatry has retrograded; polytheism has gone quickly backward.

Asa said, in effect: “We must be right about our gods before we can be
right with one another.” That is true teaching. With a wrong theology we
never can have a thoroughly sound and healthy economic system.

This was the corner-stone upon which Asa built his great and gracious
policy. What was the effect of it upon other people? We find that the
effect then was what it must always be:

“They fell to him out of Israel in abundance when they saw that the Lord,
his God, was with him.”

Such is the influence of a great leadership. If Asa had been halting,
the people would have halted, too. Asa was positive; and positiveness,
sustained by such beneficence, begets courage in other people. “They fell
to him out of Israel in abundance”--that is, they came over to him and
were on his side. They ranked themselves with Asa; they looked for his
banner and called it theirs, “when they saw that the Lord, his God, was
with him.”

Nations perish for want of great leaders. Social reforms are dependent to
a large extent upon the spirit of the leadership which has adopted them.
The Church is always looking around for some bolder man, some more heroic
and dauntless spirit, who will utter the new truth, if any truth can be
new--say, rather, the next truth; for truth has always a next self, a
larger and immediately impending self, and the hero, who is also martyr,
must reveal that next phase of truth and die on Golgotha for his pains.

Can we not, in some small sense, be leaders in our little circles--in our
business relations, in our family life, in our institutional existence?
Many people can follow a tune who can not begin one. That is the
philosophy we would unfold and enforce.

Regard all leaders with prayerful hopefulness in so far as they want to
do good and to be good. Sympathize with them; say to Asa, even the king:
“What thou hast done thou hast well done; in God’s name we bless thee
for the purification of the land and for the encouragement of all noble
things.”

Asa showed the limits of human forbearance and human philosophy. He
broke down in the very act of doing that which was right because he went
too far. He made a covenant, and the people made it along with him.

Solemn renewals of the original covenant which God made with their
fathers in the wilderness occur from time to time in the history of the
Jews, following upon intervals of apostacy. This renewal in the reign of
Asa is the first on record. The next falls three hundred years later, in
the reign of Josiah. There is a third in the time of Nehemiah. On such
occasions the people bound themselves by a solemn oath to observe all
the directions of the Law, and called down God’s curse upon them if they
forsook it.

“And they entered into a covenant to seek the Lord God of their fathers
with all their heart and all their soul; that whosoever would not seek
the Lord God of Israel should be put to death, whether small or great,
whether man or woman.”

That is the danger. You can not make men religious by killing them, by
threatening them, by inflicting upon them any degree of penalty. Do not
force a child to church. Lead it; lure it; make the church so bright and
homelike and beautiful that the child will eagerly long for the time to
come when the door will be opened.

Asa was impartial. There was a touch of real grandeur about the man. He
would not even allow his mother to keep an idol. The queen had an idol of
her own “in a grove.”

“And also concerning Maachah, the mother of Asa, the king, he removed her
from being queen, because she had made an idol in a grove; and Asa cut
down her idol, and stamped it and burnt it at the brook Kidron.”

Thus ruthlessly Asa disestablished that little royal church. See how
burningly in earnest the man was, and what a man will do when his
earnestness is fervent! He knows nothing about fathers, mothers,
partialities or concessions. He says: “Light is the foe of darkness, and
you can not have any little dark corner of your own. This light must find
you out, chase away every shadow and purify every secret place in human
life and thought.”

Some have supposed that Maachah, the mother of Abijah, and Maachah, the
“mother” of Asa, were different persons, the former being the daughter
of Absalom, the latter the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. There are really
no grounds for this. Maachah, the mother of Abijah, enjoyed the rank of
queen mother not only during his short reign of three years, but also
during that of her grandson, Asa, until deposed by him on account of her
idolatry.

The original word for “idol” appears to signify a “horrible abomination”
of some monstrous kind; and instead of “in a grove” we should read “for
an asherah,” the wooden emblem of the Canaanitish deity.

There seems little doubt that some obscene emblem is meant, of the kind
so often connected with worship of the productive powers of nature in
ancient religions--substituted, as a still greater abomination, for the
ordinary asherah. Clearly, the act of Maachah was one of so flagrant a
kind that Asa took the unusual step, on which the historian here lays
great stress, of degrading her in her old age from her high dignity,
besides hewing down her idol and burning it publicly under the walls of
Jerusalem.

“Now,” said Asa, in effect, “what is good for the public is good for the
individual; what is good for the subject is good for the queen.”


ATHALIAH.

Athaliah was a king’s daughter and a king’s wife. She had a son whose
name was Ahaziah, but, as he was an invalid, he did not occupy the throne
longer than about twelve months.

As soon as his mother saw that he was dead a fierce and most murderous
passion seized her heart. She then resolved to be queen herself.

In order to carry out this nefarious purpose, she slew all the seed
royal, so that, there being no successor to the throne, she ascended it
and reigned as queen.

It is very wonderful that some of the most cruel and startling things in
the world have been done by women. One called Laodice poisoned her six
sons one by one, that she might be empress of Constantinople. Another,
ironically named Irene, took the eyes out of her own boy, that he might
be incapable of empire, and that she might reign alone.

These things were done in the ancient time. Is any of the cruelty of
heart left still? The accident may be changed--what about the passion and
purpose of the heart? Let every one answer the question individually.

Athaliah made her heap of corpses and laughed in her mad heart, saying
that now she was queen. But always some Fleance escapes the murderer’s
clutch. In that heap of corpses there was an infant boy, hardly twelve
months old; he was spared. The sword had not taken his little life, but
the queen knew not that the child Joash had escaped. He was taken and
with his nurse was hidden in the Temple, and there he was trained by the
good priest, Jehoiada, for some six years. All the while the queen was
reigning and doing evil.

The little boy was saved by his aunt, Jehosheba, and when six years had
passed and the boy was seven years of age, being twelve months old when
he was snatched from impending ruin, Jehoiada called the rulers together
and all the chief and mighty men of Israel. He then revealed the secret
to them.

Having disposed these dignitaries in military order and with military
precision around the person of the young king, Jehoiada brought the
crown and put it upon his head, and he gave him the testimony or Book
of Leviticus; and, having gone through all this ceremonial process, the
young king stood upright by the pillar of inauguration in the Temple, and
all that great throng then clapped their hands and shouted: “God save the
king!” Louder the shout rang till the queen heard it in her own house,
which was not far off.

“The nearer the church, the farther from God,” has been wittily said.

Athaliah hastened to the sacred place to know the reason of this
hilarious tumult, and when the case was made clear to her she shrieked
and cried:

“Treason! Treason!”

But her voice found no echo in the hearts of men. Not a soul
fluttered--not a heart started up in the royal defense. The woman--the
evil daughter of an evil mother--was taken out by the way along which the
horses came into the king’s house, and the sword which she had thrust
into the throats of others drank her own blood.

In an event of this kind there must be some great lessons for all time.
These are not merely momentary ebullitions of wrath or malice. They have
history in them; they are red with the common blood of the whole race.

Very few men stand out in ancient history with so fair and honorable
a fame as good Jehoshaphat. It is like a tonic, intellectual and
spiritual, to read his vivid history. He was a grand king--long-headed,
good-hearted, honest and healthy in purpose of doing wondrous things for
his kingdom and for the chosen of God.

But is there not a weak point in every man? Does not the strongest man
stoop? Does not great Homer sometimes nod?

Jehoshaphat had this weakness, that he hankered after some kind of
connection with the wicked house of Ahab. He had a son, whose name was
Jehoram (or Joram), and he wanted his son married. He must look around
for royal blood. Explain it as we may--no man has explained it fully
yet--Jehoshaphat wanted to be connected with the evil house of Ahab. To
that house he looked for a wife for his son, Jehoram. His son married
Athaliah, and she brought into the kingdom all the idolatry of Ahab
and the fierce blood-thirstiness of Jezebel. That was the root of the
mischief. Some roots lie a long time before they begin to germinate.
There may be roots in our lives which will take ten years or forty years
to develop, but the root will bring forth according to its kind. Let us
take care what roots we plant in our lives--what connections we form.

Jehoram, the son of good Jehoshaphat, walked in the evil ways of the
kings of Israel, and he wrought that which was evil in the sight of
the Lord. Mark the reason given by the inspired historian: “He had the
daughter of Ahab to wife.”

What secrets were indicated by that one reason! What a whole volume of
tragedy is wrapped up in that brief sentence!

The responsibility seems to a large extent transferred from Jehoram and
placed upon his wife, who was a more subtle thinker, a more desperate
character, with a larger brain and a firmer will, with more accent and
force of personality. Jehoram played the evil trick, repeated the foul
habit, went in the wrong direction, bowed down to forbidden altars,
for--“he had the daughter of Ahab to wife.” She lured him; the seduction
was hers; she won the conquest. When he would have bowed the knee to the
God of Heaven, she laughed at him and mocked him into Baal worship. He
fell as a victim into her industrious and cruel hands.

“Be not unequally yoked together.” Do not look upon marriage lightly;
do not suppose that it is a game for the passing day, a flash and
gone, a hilarious excitement, a wine-bibbing, a passing around of
kind salutations, then dying away like a trembling echo. Beware what
connections you form, and do not suppose that the laws of God can be set
aside with impunity. Get out of your heads the infinite mistake that
you can do as you like and escape the operation of divine law. Deliver
yourselves from the cruel delusion that you can sow tares and reap wheat.
Be not deceived. God is not mocked, for whatever a man sows that shall he
also reap.

Our family life explains our public attitude and influence. What we are
at home we are really abroad.

Wives, do not destroy your husbands. When they would do good, help them.
When they propose to give to the cause of charity, suggest that the
donation be doubled, not divided. When they would help in any good and
noble work, give them sympathy, prayer and blessing. We never knew a
man yet of any enduring public power that was not made by his wife, and
we never knew a public man yet that fully appreciated the value of that
ministry. It is secret; it is at home; it does not show. It is chalked on
a black-board, and not gilded on a high ceiling; it is silent, but vital.

We have seen a man go down in his church life, and we have wondered why.
It was his wife--the daughter of Ahab--who was degrading him, narrowing
him and dwarfing him in his thinking and sympathy.

We have seen a man go up in his public influence, and we have found that
it was his wife who was encouraging him, helping him, telling him that he
was on the right way, and wishing him good luck in the name of the Lord.

See to it that your home is right. Have a beautiful home--morally and
religiously; a sacred house, a sanctuary where joy is the singing angel.
And then, when you come abroad into the market-place, into the pulpit,
into parliament, into trade and commerce or into any of the social
relations of life, you will bring with you all the inspiration which
comes from a home that blooms like a garden or glows like a Summer sun.

Do not suppose that the divine purpose can be set aside by Athaliahs,
Irenes, Laodices or any false, furious or desperate characters of any
kind.

The Lord promised David that he should always have a candle in Jerusalem.
The light was very low sometimes--it was reduced to a spark in young
Joash; but it was God’s candle, and Athaliah’s wild breath could not blow
out that light. The word of the Lord abideth for ever.

Observe a very strong peculiarity in human nature, as shown in the
conduct of Athaliah. She went into the Temple and saw the young Joash
with a crown upon his head, and she shrieked out: “Treason! Treason!”

Poor innocent Athaliah! Who would not pity so gentle a dove, with a
breast of feathers and a cruel dart rankling in it? Sweet woman--gentle
and loving creature--injured queen! Her hands were perfectly clean; she
was the victim of a cruel stratagem. She was outwitted by heads longer
than hers. She, poor unsuspecting soul, had been brought into this
condition, and all she could do was to cry in injured helplessness:

“Treason! Treason!”

How moral we become under some circumstances! How very righteous we may
stand up to be under certain provocations! Who could but pity poor
Athaliah, who had nursed her grandchildren with a wolf’s care? We do this
very self-same thing very often in our own lives. Where is the man who
does not suppose that he has a right to do wrong? But let other people do
wrong, and then hear him!

Given a religious sect of any name whatsoever, that has the domination
of any neighborhood, and the probability is that that religious sect
will use its supremacy somewhat mischievously in certain circumstances.
It will not let anybody who opposes its tenets have an acre of ground
in that neighborhood, nor will it allow any sect that opposes its
principles to build a church there. No! It takes a righteous view of the
circumstances; it will not trifle with its responsibilities; it can allow
no encroachment. It is charged with the spirit of stewardship, and must
be faithful to its sacred obligations.

So it cants and whines, whatever its name be. If it be the name we bear
religiously, so much the worse. We speak of no particular sect, but of
any sect that may be placed in such peculiar circumstances as to claim
the domination and supremacy in any neighborhood.

Now, let any member of that sect leave that particular locality and go
to live under a wholly different set of circumstances, and apply for a
furlong of ground, or for a house that he may occupy as tenant. Then let
it be found that his religious convictions are a bar to his enjoyment
of local properties and liberties. He will cry out: “Persecution!
Persecution!” How well it befits his lips! The very man who in one
district persecuted to the death those who opposed him removes to
another locality, where a screw is applied to his own joints, and he
raises the cry of persecution. It is Athaliah’s old trick, and will have
Athaliah’s poor reward.

See how the cry of the wicked is unheeded. Athaliah was a woman, and by
so much had a claim upon the sympathy of the strong. Yet no man’s heart
went out to her in loyal reverence.

Jehoash (or Joash, as the name was shortened) was trained in the Temple,
under the good Jehoiada. He was blessed in his aunt--for it was his
aunt who took him, the daughter of Ahab, but not by the mother of
Athaliah--and Joash did good all the days of Jehoiada, the priest. See
the influence of a noble life. See how religion may help royalty, and
how that which is morally true lifts up patriotism to a higher level.
No country is sound at heart--through and through good and likely to
endure--that draws not the inspiration of its patriotism from the
loftiness and purity of its religion.

All these tragedies are making the Earth reek with abomination today.
Athaliah lives in a vigorous progeny.


BALAAM.

Balaam comes into the narrative most suddenly--but he will never go out
of it again. Other men have come into the Bible story quite as suddenly,
but they have only remained for a time. Balaam will never disappear; we
shall read of him when we come to the Book of the Revelation of John the
Divine.

There are some historical presences that you can never get rid of. It is
useless to quibble and question. The same mystery occurs in our own life.
Some persons, having been once seen, are seen for ever. You can not get
away from the image or the influence, or forget the magical touch of hand
or mind or ear; they turn up in the last chapter of your life Bible. You
can not tell whence they come. Their origin is as great a mystery as is
the origin of Melchisedek; they come into your lifelines as quickly and
abruptly as came Elijah, the Tishbite; and they take up their residence
with you--subtly coloring every thought, secretly and mightily turning
speech into new accents and unsuspected expressions full of significance
and revealing that significance in ever-surprising ways and tones.

Why sit down and look at the story of Balaam as though it were something
that occurred once for all? It occurs every day. God teaches by surprise.
He sets the stranger in our life, and while we are wondering He turns our
wonder into a mystery more sublime.

Who would have a life four-square, in the sense of limitation, visible
boundary, tangible beginning and ending? Who would not rather be in the
world as if he had been in some other world, and as if he were moving
on to some larger world? We lose power when we lose mystery. Let us not
chaffer about words. If the spirit of mystery is in a man, the spirit of
worship is in him; and if the spirit of worship is in him, it may detail
itself into beliefs, actions and services which are accounted right, and
whose rightness will be proved by their beneficence. Balaam comes as
suddenly as Melchisedek, as unexpectedly as Elijah; but we shall find
him at the very last an instructive historical character.

He is called Balaam, the son of Beor, and he is domiciled at Pethor, on
the River Euphrates. At that time the king of Moab was called Balak, and
when Balak saw how Israel had destroyed the Amorites he said:

“Fighting is out of the question. If we have to come to battle, we may as
well surrender before we begin; the numbers are overwhelming. Now shall
this company lick up all that are round about us, as the ox licketh up
the grass of the field.”

You can hear the lick and the crunch, and be present at the destruction.
It was a day of fear and much sorrow in Moab.

What, then, was to be done?

Herein came the wisdom of Balak. He also lives to the end of life’s
chapter, for to the end of that chapter we shall find the touch of
superstition in the human mind. Balak would have recourse to supernatural
help. He had heard of Balaam, the soothsayer of Pethor--a man of
divination, a person who had power to bless and to curse--the Simon Magus
of his day. So he took advantage of his superstition, and thought to sow
the air with curses which would work where his little sword could not
reach.

That is not a mean thought. Call it perversion or superstition--you do
not touch the inner and vital mystery of the case. The great agonies of
life are not to be explained by calling them perversions, or labeling
them superstitions, or denouncing them as nightmares or dreams; they
are there. Man must obey voices which are not always articulate and
reportable as to words and tones. It may be more superstitious to deny
the supernatural than to affirm it. Never forget the cant that is talked
against cant.

Do not believe that they are the heavenly, pure and brilliant souls who
have no church, no religion, no altar; who live under the dome of their
own hats and walk on the marble of their own boots. Whose prophets, pray,
are they? They must be accounted for, as well as the Melchisedeks, the
Balaams and Elijahs of old time. What is their history? Where have they
made their mark? What marvels of beneficence have they performed? Or do
they only live in the very doubtful region of sneering at other people’s
piety?

Balak’s was a great thought. We do not adopt its form, but we should
perhaps do unwisely to reject its spirit and intent. Balak said: “Numbers
are against us. If it is to be a mere contention of army against army,
Moab will be destroyed at once. The thing to be done--if it can be
done--is to enlist the service and the action of the supernatural.” Quite
right. We say so now. If that can be done, any other thing that can be
done is contemptible in comparison.

So Balak sent for Balaam, who made answer that he would not come.
By-and-by Balak sent other princes more honorable still, with offers of
promotion and honor and abundant wages. Balaam said he would ask God. He
asked God, and angered Him by so doing. Some second prayers are worse
than superstitions.

So God said: “If the men come to call thee, rise up, and go with them;
yet the word which I shall say unto thee, that shalt thou do.” But God’s
anger was kindled against Balaam.

“And God’s anger was kindled because he went; and the angel of the Lord
stood in the way for an adversary against him. Now, he was riding upon
his ass, and his two servants were with him. And the ass saw the angel
of the Lord standing in the way, and his sword drawn in his hand; and
the ass turned aside out of the way, and went into the field; and Balaam
smote the ass, to turn her into the way. But the angel of the Lord stood
in a path of the vineyards, a wall being on this side and a wall on that
side.”

When Balak heard of Balaam’s arrival he was glad. Gold went for nothing,
now the soothsayer had come. Riches were as water poured forth. In those
days the supernatural went for something in the market-place. It is the
cheapest of all things now. Ideas are without value; religious thoughts
are mere breath. But Balaam remembered that he was only to speak what God
told him; so he began to play the priest. He would have altars put up.

He took up his parable, and said: “Balak, the king of Moab, hath brought
me from Aram, out of the mountains of the east, saying: ‘Come, curse me
Jacob,’ and ‘Come, defy Israel.’”

Balaam would have altars put up and sacrifices rendered. But the answer
was: “No. Israel can not be cursed.”

So Balak took him to another point of view, where perhaps, the multitude
looked greater or did not look so great. “And he took up his parable, and
said: ‘Rise up, Balak, and hear; hearken unto me, thou son of Zippor.’”
And again the people were to rise like a lion, and lift up themselves as
a young lion; and the people were not to lie down until they had eaten of
the prey and drunk of the blood of the slain.

“Well, then,” said Balak, “if that be the case, this thou must do for me:
Neutralize thyself; be nothing; act as if thou hadst not come at all.
Neither curse them at all, nor bless them at all.”

But Balaam said: “No. You can not treat God’s messengers in that way. As
a matter of fact, they are here; you have to account for them being here,
and to reckon with them while they are here.”

We can not quiet things by ignoring them. Simply by writing “Unknowable”
across the heavens we really do not exclude supernatural or immeasurable
forces. The ribbon is too narrow to shut out the whole Heaven. It is but
a little strip, and looks contemptible against the infinite arch. We do
not exclude God by denying Him, nor by saying that we do not know Him, or
that He can not be known. We can not neutralize God, so as to make Him
neither the one thing nor the other.

So Balaam was the greatest mystery that Balak had to deal with. It is
just the same with the Bible--God’s supernatural Book. It will not lie
where we want it to lie. It has a way of getting up through the dust
that gathers upon it and shaking itself, and making its pages felt. It
will open at the wrong place. Would it open at some catalogue of names
it might be tolerated, but it opens at hot places, where white thrones
are and severe judgments, and where scales are tried and measuring wands
tested. It will speak to the soul about the wrong doing that never came
to any thing, and the wicked thought that would have burned the heavens
and scattered dishonor upon the throne of God.

Balak said, in effect: “Would to Heaven I could get rid of this man.” He
took Balaam to another point of view, and Balaam “set his face toward the
wilderness, and took up his parable.” He sang a sweet and noble song:
“How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob! And thy tabernacles, O Israel! As
the valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the river’s side, as
the trees of lign aloes which the Lord hath planted, and as cedar trees
beside the waters. He shall pour the water out of his buckets, and his
seed shall be in many waters, and his king shall be higher than Agag,
and his kingdom shall be exalted. God brought him forth out of Egypt; he
hath, as it were, the strength of an unicorn; he shall eat up the nations
his enemies, and shall break their bones and pierce them through with his
arrows. He couched, he lay down as a lion, and as a great lion; who shall
stir him up? Blessed is he that blesseth thee, and cursed is he that
curseth thee.”

Balak made a bad bargain that day. He added unto his troubles, instead of
diminishing them.

Balak would gladly have parted with Balaam, but he could not get rid of
him; and Balak was wroth. It became a king to become angry. And Balak’s
anger was kindled against Balaam, and he smote his hands together and
said unto Balaam: “I called thee to curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou
hast altogether blessed them these three times. Therefore, now flee thou
to thy place. I thought to promote thee unto great honor, but lo, the
Lord hath kept thee back from honor.”

Balaam then made a great speech to Balak. He said: “Is this not precisely
what I said to the king’s messengers? Did I not say: ‘If Balak would give
me his house full of silver and gold, I can not go beyond the commandment
of the Lord, to do either good or bad of mine own mind; but what the Lord
saith, that will I speak’? Now, I will tell that which I see.”

And then came the parable of the man whose eyes are open:

And he took up his parable, and said: “Balaam, the son of Beor, hath
said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said, he hath said which heard
the words of God, and knew the knowledge of the Most High, which saw the
vision of the Almighty, falling into a trance, but having his eyes open;
I shall see him, but not now; I shall behold him, but not nigh; there
shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise out of Israel,
and shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of
Sheth. And Edom shall be a possession, Seir also shall be a possession
for his enemies; and Israel shall do valiantly. Out of Jacob shall come
he that shall have dominion, and shall destroy him that remaineth of the
city.”

Then the parable is continued, Balaam looking Balak full in the face;
and last of all “Balaam rose up, and went and returned to his place, and
Balak also went his way.”

You can not carve your God into any shape that will please your fancy.
You can not send for any true faith and bribe it to speak your blessings
or your cursings. Balaam was a man of noble sentiments. Look at some of
his words: “Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be
like his.” And again: “God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the
son of man, that he should repent.” And again: “I shall see him, but not
now; I shall behold him, but not nigh.”

Then take the grand words which he spoke to Balak, as reported in the
prophecies of Micah. Never did man preach a nobler sermon than this: “He
hath showed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy
God.”

Who can amend that speech? Who can refine that gold? Who dares touch that
lily with his mean paint? Who taught Balaam that great speech?

We sometimes say we find, scattered up and down in ancient literature,
morals as beautiful as any we find in the Bible. Possibly so. Who wrote
them? Whence did they come? Is God the God of one corner of the creation?
Is God a parochial Deity?

Is there not a spirit in man--universal man--and does not the Spirit of
the Most High give him understanding? Wherever there is a line of beauty,
God wrote it; wherever there is a sentiment which is charged with the
spirit of beneficence, that may be claimed as a good gift of God.

Apostle Paul never uttered a nobler sentiment than is uttered by Balaam,
as reported in the prophecies of Micah. This is the Sermon upon the
Mount in anticipation. That is the vicious Church, built on the wrong
foundation, aiming at the wrong Heaven, which does not recognize in every
literature and in every nation all that is good, noble, wise, prophetic.

Balaam’s convictions and wishes disagreed sometimes. Therein he was most
human. He knew he ought not to go to Balak, and yet he wished to go. He
would ask the second time; he would doubt his own convictions, or he
would adjust them according to the shape and temper of circumstances.
Wherever he came from, he claims herein to be quite a near neighbor of
ours. Doubt may exist as to the exact relation of Pethor to the river
upon which it was built, but there can be no doubt whatever of the blood
relationship between Balaam and our own age. Speaking impulsively from
the center of his convictions, he said: “No. Nothing shall tempt me to
go. You speak of gold and silver. Were Balak to give me his house full of
gold and silver, I would not go. I am the Lord’s servant, and the Lord’s
work alone will I do.”

Then the thought occurred to him--a second message coming, borne by more
honorable princes: “Perhaps I might go and obtain this wealth and honor,
and still do my duty.”

He is on the downward road now. A man who thinks to do forbidden things
and spend the bounty for the advantage of the Church is lost; there is no
power in him that can overcome the gravitation that sucks him downward.
He says: “I will bring back all Balak’s gold and silver, and add a
transept to the church or another course of marble to the altar.”

He will never return. God will not have His house so patched and
bungled; nor does He want Balak’s gold for the finishing of His
sanctuary. A nobler spirit was Abram, who said no to the king of Sodom,
“lest thou shouldest say: ‘I have made Abram rich.’”

The whole story of Balaam is intensely Oriental and primeval. The first
deputation is dismissed in obedience to a divine warning; but, so far
as we know, “the wages of unrighteousness,” which Balaam loved, are
carefully retained. A second embassy of nobler messengers, carrying
richer gifts, succeeds. He does not at once dismiss them, as God had
required, but presses for permission to go with them, which at last is
granted.

Balaam would earn the fame and honor apparently within his grasp, yet he
knows that when the prophetic afflatus comes on him he can only utter
what it prompts. With a feigned religiousness, he protests that if Balak
were to give him his house full of silver and gold he could not go beyond
the word of Jehovah, his God, to do less or more; but he also bids them
wait overnight to see if he may not, after all, be allowed to go with
them. If his ignoble wish to be allowed to curse an unoffending nation be
gratified, he has the wealth he craves; if it be refused, he can appeal
to his words as proof of his being only the mouth-piece of God.

That Balaam should have been allowed to go with Balak’s messengers was
only the permission given every man to act as a free agent, and in no
way altered the divine command, that he should bless, and not curse. Yet
he goes as if at liberty to do either, and lets Balak deceive himself by
false hopes, when the will of God has been already decisively made known.

Balaam’s was a maneuvering life--very truthful, and yet very false; very
godly, and yet very worldly--a most composite and self-contradictory
life, and still a most human life. Balaam never breaks away from the
brotherhood of the race in any of his inconsistencies. When he is very
good, there are men living today who are just as good as Balaam was;
when he is very bad, it would not be difficult to confront him with men
who are quite his equals in wrong doing. When he is both good and bad
almost at the same moment, he does not separate himself from the common
experience of the race. He was always arranging, adjusting, endeavoring
to meet one thing by another, and to set off one thing over against
another. It was a kind of gamester life--full of subtle calculation,
touched with a sort of wonder which becomes almost religious, and steeped
in a superstition which reduces many of the actions of life to a state of
moral mystery wholly beyond ordinary comprehension.


ELAH.

There was once a king in Israel named Elah. He reigned over Israel, in
Tirzah, two years. He had a servant called Zimri, who was a captain of
his chariots.

Zimri was a born traitor. Treachery was in his very blood. In the case of
Elah, Zimri had a marked advantage, for Elah was a drunken fool. He was
in the habit of visiting the house of another of his servants, a steward
called Arza. There he had what drink he asked for, and he asked for a
great deal--so much that he was often drunk in his servant’s house. On
one of these occasions Zimri went in and killed him, and reigned in his
stead.

These are the facts with which we have to deal. Are they very ancient, or
are they happening about us every day? Is Elah dead? Is Zimri clean gone
for ever? And is the house of the servant Arza closed, so that the master
can drink no more with the steward?

Elah lives in every man who has great chances or opportunities in life,
but allows them to slip away from him through one leak in the character.
Elah was a king and was the son of a king, so his openings in life were
wide and splendid; but he loved strong drink, and thus through that leak
in his character all that might have made him a man oozed away, and left
him a king in nothing but the barren name.

Strong drink will ruin any man. It is the supreme curse of England. I
will say nothing now of the old, but to the young I may speak a word.
I care not, young man, how many and how brilliant in life your chances
are, if you drink wine in the morning, as many young men in London do,
you are as good as damned already. You think not, but that only shows the
infinite deceitfulness of the enemy. He tells you:

“Nothing of the kind. This is parson’s twaddle. Take your wine when you
want it, and let it alone when you do not care for it.”

There is suppressed mockery in that high challenge. There is no soundness
of health in it. Every drink but leaves you weaker. Every emptied glass
is another link added to the strong chain thrown upon your limbs.

Zimri still lives in all persons who take advantage of the weaknesses of
others. Zimri knew that Elah was a drunkard, and he further knew through
Elah’s habit of drunkenness alone could he be reached. On every other
side of his character Elah may have been a strong man--acute, shrewd and
far-sighted--but when in drink he was, of course, weak and foolish. Zimri
played his game accordingly. He said:

“Elah goes to Arza’s house after sundown. In half an hour after going, he
will begin to fall under the effects of wine; then the worst wine will
be brought out, and he will go mad under its poison and become drowsy. I
must get Arza out of the way. The fool will go on any errand I name, on
promise of another horse; that is it.”

The Bible says: “And Zimri went in and smote him and killed him.” He took
advantage of his master’s weakness, and his progeny is numerous on the
Earth.

Some people trade on the weaknesses of others. They study them. They
adapt themselves to them. They watch for striking time, and seldom miss
the mark. How else could the net be always ready for the bird? How else
could the pit be always prepared for the unsuspecting and bewildered
traveler? There is an infernal science in these things--a devil’s black
art!

And does not Arza still live in those who find the means whereby men may
conceal their evil habits and indulge their unholy desires? They seem to
say: “In my house you may do what you please. I shall not look at you.
Come when you please; go when you like; I am nobody, if you like to call
me so.”

Tirzah, whose name means pleasantness and which was Elah’s capital,
was an ancient royal city of the Canaanites, captured by Joshua. After
its conquest it is not again mentioned in history till the time of
Jeroboam, who appears to have chosen it as his principal residence.
The geographical position of Tirzah has not been given by any ancient
geographer. Zimri reigned only seven days in Tirzah. Omri, captain of
the host, was made king over Israel in the camp. He besieged Tirzah and
took it. Zimri, seeing that the city was taken, went into the king’s
palace, set it on fire and perished in it. The last mention of Tirzah in
Scripture history is in connection with Menahem, who went from Tirzah to
Samaria, “and smote Shallum, and reigned in his stead.” Solomon made the
comparison: “Thou art beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah.”


ELIJAH.

Elijah means “Jehovah is my God.” There is often much in a name. It is
a history, sometimes--the summing up of generations; it is sometimes an
inspiration, recalling memories that stir the soul to high daring.

There are two places called Tishbi--one in Gilead and the other
in Galilee. Elijah belonged to the former. Sometimes character is
mysteriously and very deeply affected by country. Gilead was a wild and
mountainous district, bordering on Arabia, and consequently half Arab in
its customs. There was a wonderful similarity between the man and the
region; stern, bleak, grand, majestic and awful were they both. John
the Baptist seemed to bring the wilderness with him when he came into
the city. Children born in luxury are apt to be themselves luxurious.
Children born in slavery will hardly ever be free, though slavery has
been abolished. To the end of life we carry the color which first
impressed itself on our vision.

All revelations seem to us to be sudden. Look at the suddenness of the
appearance of Ahijah to Jeroboam, and look at the instance before us:
“Elijah, the Tishbite, said unto Ahab.” The total apostasy of the Ten
Tribes (Israel) was now almost accomplished, and yet a faithful prophet
of the Lord stands up in the degenerate land and declares that Jehovah is
his God, and in sacred solitariness protests against the abominations of
Israel and her king.

No mild man would have been equal to the occasion. God adapts His
ministry to circumstances. He sends a nurse to the sick room and a
soldier to the battle field. The son of consolation and the son of
thunder can not change places. You are right when you say that the dew
and the light and the soft breeze are God’s; but you may not, therefore,
suppose that the thunder and the hurricane and the flood belong to a
meaner lord.

Imagine the two men standing face to face--Ahab, the dissolute king,
and Elijah, the faithful prophet. Probably there is no finer picture
in ancient history. Terrible indeed is the national crisis when king
and prophet come into collision. There is not a combat between two men.
Mark that very closely. It is Right against Wrong, Faithfulness against
Treachery, Purity against Corruption. Look at them--Ahab and Elijah--as
they face one another! Consider the boldness of the prophet. Religion is
never to be ashamed of its own testimony.

As we look at the scene, not wanting in the elements of the highest
tragedy, we see the value of one noble witness in the midst of public
corruption and decay, and the grandeur as well as necessity of a distinct
personal profession of godliness. It is not enough to be godly; we must
avow it in open conduct and articulate confession.

Let us now observe how Elijah proceeds to deal with Ahab. “There shall
not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word.” Here is
physical punishment for moral transgression. So it is; and that is just
what a parent does when he uses the rod upon his child for falsehood.
You can only punish people according to their nature. The garroter
can submit to any number of censures and lectures, but he dreads the
cat-o’-nine-tails.

Physical punishment for moral transgression is the law of society. So the
liar is thrown out of his situation; the ill-tempered child is whipped;
the dishonorable man is expelled from social confidence.

With regard to the particular punishment denounced against Ahab, it is to
be remembered that drought is one of the punishments threatened by the
law if Israel forsook Jehovah and turned after other gods.

This, then, was the brief communication which the prophet addressed to
the king. God’s threatenings are terrible in their conciseness. He leaves
no room in a multitude of works for ambiguity and verbal wriggling. The
soul that sinneth shall die. “The wages of sin is death.” “There is no
peace, saith the Lord, unto the wicked.”

And as He can be concise in threatening, so He can be concise in promise:
“I will give you rest.” “I will give you living water.” “He that
believeth shall be saved.” “Ask, and it shall be given you.”

Thus great things can be said in few words: “God is light.” “God is
love.” “Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.” “Ye
must be born again.”

At the bidding of the word of the Lord, Elijah turned eastward and hid
himself by the brook Cherith, a place nowhere else mentioned in the
Bible, and “no place like it has as yet been discovered in Palestine.” It
was a torrent-course facing the Jordan, “but whether it was one of those
which seam Mount Ephraim or of those on the opposite side of Jordan, in
the prophet’s own country, is uncertain.”

But what is the meaning of the extraordinary expression: “I have
commanded the ravens to feed thee”? By omitting the points, which are
generally allowed to have no authority, the Hebrew letters may signify
Arabians. Then the passage would read: “I have commanded the Arabians
to feed thee.” Or, if we retain the present pointing, the word may be
translated “merchants,” according to “The Speaker’s Commentary.” But it
is better to allow the word “ravens” to stand. It implies a miracle; but
the whole Bible is a miracle, and so is our own daily life, could we
but see the inner movement and look beyond all symbols to the spiritual
reality.

But Elijah’s brook dried up. Prophets may be overtaken by the operation
of their own prophecies. The great laws are impartial, yet wonderful is
the scope within which exceptions may be established. This incident gives
an instance in point.

“Arise, get thee to Zarephath, which belongeth to Zidon, and dwell there.
Behold, I have commanded a widow woman there to sustain thee.” This place
is called Sarepta in the New Testament. It lay upon the great public
road which connected the two towns. A little village called Sarafend now
occupies the situation.

But how did it come about that Elijah was sent to a place so near the
city of Jezebel’s father? It has been suggested that it would be the last
place that he would be suspected of having chosen as a retreat. When
Elijah came to the gate of the city the widow woman was there gathering
sticks, and he asked her for a little water in a vessel, that he might
drink. And as she was going to fetch it, he asked her to bring also a
morsel of bread in her hand. But she had no bread--not so much as a
cake--only a handful of meal in a barrel and a little oil in a cruse.

She was just going to dress this little food for herself and her son,
“that we may eat it and die.” But Elijah claimed it in the name of the
Lord, and gave to her in return the gracious promise: “The barrel of meal
shall not waste, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, until the day that
the Lord sendeth rain upon the Earth.”

We may here admire and imitate one of the finest instances of ancient
faith. The woman was asked for all she had, and she gave it. But mark,
she was put in possession of a promise. This is God’s law. He gives the
promise first, and then asks for the faith of man. It was so in the ease
of Abraham. It is so with ourselves today.

“And the barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil fail.”
This is the continual miracle of nature; this is the security of life. We
are puzzled by it, but what of that? Are possibilities to be determined
by our weakness or by God’s strength? We could have increased the flour
had we sown the seed, reaped the grain and called in the aid of the
miller. Now let us venture on the supposition that Almighty God is able
to do just a little more than we can do, and the whole difficulty is
gone. The air wastes not, nor the light, nor the force of nature; what if
God can touch points which happen to lie beyond the range of our short
fingers? We must allow something for Deity.

And now sorrow fell upon the poor woman’s house. Her only child died,
and her heart was lacerated even to torment and agony. But the Lord was
merciful. Elijah took the dead child away into a loft--the upper chamber,
which was often the best part of an Eastern house--and cried unto the
Lord, and stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried again
and again unto the Lord, and the child’s life returned. Then the glad
mother hailed Elijah as a man, and one in whose mouth was the word of the
Lord.

Elijah had put himself beyond the reach of Ahab--not because he feared
him or distrusted the power of God in critical circumstances--but because
God’s providence or government is a great scheme with innumerable sides,
and requires time for its full disclosure and accomplishment. We are not
to hasten the march of God. To every thing there is a season. Everywhere
we see this idea of time observed and honored. Though there is famine in
the land, we can not urge the seasons forward. The child, too, must have
years of growth, though his father be disabled and there be none to earn
the household bread but himself.

So in the case before us. Ahab must be wearied out with searching for
Elijah. He must be made to see how fruitless may be the efforts even of a
king. And at last, when success does come, it must come not from his side
at all.

We have said that Ahab was a speculative idolater rather than a cruel
persecutor. Jezebel acted the part of cruelty; Ahab acted the part
of unbeliever and spiritual rebel generally. A proof of the probable
correctness of this view is found in the incident before us, for when
Ahab met Elijah he did not show a spirit of cruelty. He said unto the
prophet: “Art thou he that troubleth Israel?” He did not threaten Elijah
with the sword; he did not demand his immediate surrender and arrest. He
seems rather to have looked upon Elijah with wonder--perhaps not unmixed
with admiration of a figure so independent and audacious.

The tone of the king’s mind may be inferred from the kind of challenge
which he accepted. It exactly suited his speculative genius. Elijah
proposed a trial between himself and the idolatrous prophets, 850 in
number--proposing that the god who answered by fire should be God. The
idea instantly commended itself to Ahab as excellent. He liked the high
and practical speculation. He was fond of intellectual combat, and he
warmed at the notion of a holy fray. The man who could accept a notion
of this kind was not cruel, wild or fond of human blood. Ahab was even
wickedly religious; the more altars and groves the better--yea, altar
upon altar, until the pile reached to Heaven; and grove after grove,
until the line met itself again and formed a cordon around the world. If
he had started from a right center, Ahab had been the foremost evangelist
in the ancient Church.

Let us now look at the controversy itself.

This plan was proposed by the prophet of the Lord, and not by the
servants of Baal. Truth addresses a perpetual challenge to all false
religions and all wicked and incompetent workers. Its challenges have
heightened and broadened in tone from the first ages until now.

Moses challenged the necromancers of Egypt; Elijah challenged the priests
of Baal; Christ challenges the world.

At first the challenge was more strictly physical; but now it is
intensely spiritual. What religion produces the highest and finest type
of character? That is the challenging question.

That sane men should prefer a display of physical power or skill to a
spiritual contest is an illustration of the infancy and rudeness of
their minds, and not a proof of the best form of competition. Where,
in Christian or in pagan lands, have we the finest men, the purest
character, the most sensitive honor? Where are schools, hospitals,
asylums and charities of every kind most abundant?

That Christian countries are disgraced by some of the foulest crimes
possible in human life, may but show that their very foulness and
atrocity never could have been so vividly seen and so cruelly felt but
for the enlightenment and culture furnished by Christianity. In any other
countries they would have been matters of course; but in Christian lands
their abomination is seen by the help of Christian light.

The appeal or challenge was forced upon the prophets of Baal; it was not
spontaneously accepted by them. This should be made very clear, as it is
a point apt to be overlooked.

Perhaps the common impression is that Elijah challenged the prophets
directly, standing face to face with them, without any medium of
communication.

Nothing of the kind. Elijah first challenged King Ahab, who snatched
eagerly at the sensational chance, little knowing what he was snatching
at. Having spoken first to the king, Elijah spoke next to the people, and
demanded why they hesitated between two opinions, insisting that they
should make a choice between Jehovah and Baal. Then Elijah made his grand
appeal to the people of Israel, and they answered and said: “It is well
spoken.” Having secured the approval of the king and the people, Elijah
called upon the prophets to proceed to trial.

Today Christianity appeals not to a few sectarian prophets, nor to a
few bewildered speculators, nor to a few scientists who are wild with
boy-like joy because they have found a bird’s nest, though they have
never seen the bird that built it; but Christianity makes its appeal to
the great and broad heart of human nature, to the common sufferings of
the race, to the indestructible sentiments of mankind. In Elijah’s day
the people said: “It is well spoken.” Of Christ it is said: “The common
people heard him gladly.”

Every assault upon truth must bring mockery and death upon the
assailants. Elijah mocked the prophets on Carmel and slew them at Kishon.

Elijah was a prophet of truth, but of sternness and terror. He lived in a
tempestuous atmosphere. Lightning seemed to play around his temples, and
his voice was as thunder.

Van de Velde gives a vivid delineation of the precise locality of the
Carmel contest. He was, it is believed, the first traveler who identified
the site of the “Burning.” The rock shoots up in an almost perpendicular
wall, more than two hundred feet in height on the side of the vale of
Esdrelon. This wall made the burning visible over the whole plain and
from all the surrounding heights, so that even those left behind and who
had not ascended Carmel would still have been able to witness, at no
great distance, the fire from Heaven that descended on the altar. Here
the place must have been, for it is the only point of all Carmel where
Elijah could have been so close to the brook Kishon as to take thither
the priests of Baal and slay them, return again to the mountain and pray
for rain, all in the short space of the same afternoon. Down 250 feet
beneath the altar plateau is a vaulted and very abundant fountain. While
all other fountains were dried up, one can well understand that there
might have been found here that superabundance of water which Elijah
poured so profusely over the altar.


ELISHA.

When Elijah supposed that his work was done he was ordered by Jehovah to
go up and return on his way to the wilderness of Damascus; and he who
supposed that his ministry was concluded had yet to anoint Hazael to be
king over Syria and Jehu, the son of Nimshi, to be king over Israel.

But the anointing of these kings was a comparatively insignificant
circumstance. The great point of the commission is contained in this
sentence:

“And Elisha, the son of Shaphat of Abel-mehola, shalt thou anoint to be
prophet in thy room.”

Probably it had not occurred to Elijah that he could have a successor. A
very subtle indication is thus given of his approaching end. The Lord,
instead of telling Elijah that he had many a year left to spend in holy
service, gave him to understand that even he, mighty prophet though he
was, could be dispensed with, and a man of almost unknown name would be
qualified by divine inspiration to take his room. We can not imagine
Elijah’s feelings under these circumstances. If a great demonstration
of regard had been made, on the part of the Lord God of Israel, because
Elijah was weary, the prophet might have supposed himself to be of vital
consequence to the divine economy; but to be told that Elisha, a man
who was plowing the twelfth plow in the field while his eleven servants
were plowing beside him, would succeed to the high dignity was really to
inflict in the most gracious way a very solemn humiliation upon a man
who had become so self-conscious as practically to ignore the resources
of the living God.

Elisha was a man in what we should now term comfortable circumstances. As
he was plowing in his field of Abel-mehola (“the meadow dance”) Elijah
drew near and threw over the plowman his prophetic sheep-skin mantle, and
passed on in silence, leaving Elisha himself to interpret the graphic
symbol. Elisha instantly comprehended the purpose, and, running after
Elijah, he begged to be allowed to kiss his father and mother, after
which he promised to follow the senior prophet.

It is noteworthy that at this time Elisha must have been quite a young
man--an inference which may be fairly drawn from the fact that sixty
years after this event he was still in the exercise of his prophetic
office.

It is a noticeable circumstance, which repeats itself even in our own
day, that Elisha was in many respects the exact counterpart of Elijah.

By choosing all kinds of character and capacity to represent the divine
kingdom, God shows His infinite wisdom in a way which even the dullest
understanding can hardly fail to appreciate. He is not dependent upon
one particular aspect of genius, or one particular aspect of eloquence;
but He calls whom He will to the prophetic office and the ministerial
function, and it should be our part to accept His vocations, however
much we may be surprised at the course which they take and at the social
consequences which they involve.

At the time in which Elijah and Elisha exercised their functions religion
and morals had gone down to the lowest possible point in Israel. The very
schools of the prophets had themselves felt the corrupting influence of
the times. Ahab was able to gather four hundred false prophets at a time,
the remarkable circumstance being that they were not prophets of Baal,
but false prophets of the Lord himself.

It can hardly be a matter of surprise, therefore, that a man of burning
spirit, arising under such circumstances, should begin his ministry with
displays of power which can hardly escape the charge of being stern or
even violent.

The second chapter of the second Book of Kings introduces us to the
beginning of Elisha’s ministry. He had just seen Elijah ascend, and he
felt that he was left alone to carry on the great work which had been so
wondrously conducted by a master hand.

In the twelfth verse we see how Elisha estimated the character and
service of Elijah. He exclaims: “My father! My father!” He thus indicates
the most serious loss which can befall human life. This is not altogether
a cry of reverence, but it is also a cry of orphanhood. In their brief
intercourse, one with the other, Elijah had naturally taken the paternal
place, and Elisha, as a very young man, had felt the comforting influence
exercised upon him by the mighty prophet.

This is a cry of young sensibility. The almost child feels himself to be
quite alone. He who an hour ago supposed that, after all, he might be
able to continue the work of Elijah now felt how terrible was the void
that was created by Elijah’s absence.

We do not know the bulk and value of some ministries until they are
removed from us. We become quite familiar with them, and attach no
particular significance to their exercise; we come to think we have some
right in them, and that by some means or other they will be present with
us always. When, however, the great removal does take place and we look
around for the familiar face and expect to be touched by the familiar
hand, but find our expectations disappointed, the natural cry is: “My
father! My father!”

These words, too, may fairly be construed as suggesting an aspect of
Elijah’s character which is generally overlooked. Probably it has hardly
occurred to us to regard Elijah as a man of special tenderness. We think
of him as a great comet, or as a flash of lightning, or as a mighty
whirlwind, or under any figure that suggests grandeur, majesty and force;
but we have never associated with Elijah the notion of graciousness,
tenderness, love and that easy familiarity which constitutes the very
soul of friendship.

Now, however, by the ascription of his name we do seem to know somewhat
of the genial intercourse which passed between father and son--the senior
prophet and the young apostle of God; and it is delightful to infer that
such intercourse had been conducted on the one side paternally and on the
other side filially.

We do not know altogether what men are when we only see them in public
life. The great parliamentary orator may be the simplest of all men
when he is in the domestic circle. The great commander of armies, whose
courage never quails, may have the heart of a woman when he stands in the
presence of suffering childhood. It is important for all who attempt to
delineate the characters of public men to remember that they see only
one aspect of those characters, and are not qualified to pronounce upon
the whole man.

The next expression of Elisha is: “The chariot of Israel, and the
horsemen thereof.”

This is an apparently incoherent exclamation. When properly understood,
however, it conveys a further tribute to the ministry which was exercised
by the ascending prophet. The real meaning is: “My father--so much better
than all chariots and horses; in thy absence the chariot of Israel and
the horsemen thereof are useless. They were used by thee, and under thy
conduct could be turned to good account; but, now that thou art gone,
they do but mock our loneliness and make us feel still more bitterly our
helpless condition.”

A greater question than “Where is Elijah?” now occurred to the desolate
young man. Instantly he seizes the reality of the occasion, and by
exclaiming “Where is the Lord God of Elijah?” he shows that he is not
called to a merely official position, but that he is elected to represent
the divine majesty upon Earth.

The young man thus begins well. There is nothing frivolous in his inquiry
or in his interpretation of events. The very depth of his feeling gives
us an index to the capacity of his mind. Rely upon it, that he who can
feel as Elisha did must have a mind equal in its proportions to the fine
emotions which enlarge and ennoble his heart. Had the young man deported
himself in a way which suggested self-sufficiency, his prophetic office
would have been destroyed well-nigh before it was created.

It is when we stand back in humility and in almost despair, and cry out
in our desolateness “Where is the Lord God of Elijah?” that we begin our
work in the right spirit, and only then.

In this whole ministry of righteousness and redemption there is no place
for self-sufficiency. Apostle Paul said: “Our sufficiency is of God.”
The great inquiry “Who is sufficient for these things?” keeps down
human ambition and vanity, and prepares the heart for the utterance of
prevailing prayer. The question which was thus propounded by Elisha is
full of suggestion to ourselves. When we come to read the Bible we should
not inquire so much where inspiration is, but where is wisdom which can
be applied to our own circumstances and be made unto us as the very staff
of life.

We need not exclaim, in considering the Christian ministry of our own
day: “Where are the miracles of the Lord Jesus Christ and His apostles?”
Our inquiry should be: “Where are the healed men, the comforted hearts,
the forgiven souls, the rejoicing spirits?”

Who care to inquire into the mechanism of the organ when he can hear its
music and be bowed down by its most solemn appeals?

“And when the sons of the prophets which were to view at Jericho saw him,
they said: ‘The spirit of Elijah doth rest on Elisha.’ And they came to
meet him, and bowed themselves to the ground before him.”

There was no mistaking that spirit. Who can mistake the presence and
influence of fire? Better that our spirit should be discovered than that
our credentials should be examined.

Of what avail is it that a man can produce a whole portfolio of
testimonials, if nobody has discovered in him the presence and effect of
the divine Spirit?

This tribute is also to the credit of the sons of the prophets, for their
judgment was vital, and was not accidental. There are men who will only
regard providence as operating in one way, or as operating in one form.
These sons of the prophets did not belong to such an inferior class of
judges.

It is remarkable, too, that the organic unity of the prophetic office
is hereby recognized. The sons of the prophets do not treat Elisha as a
novelty, a new sensation, or as representing a new point of departure.
They unite the old with the new; though the man has changed, the spirit
remains the same.

This is what must be always regarded in reading Christian history and in
watching the course of the Christian ministry. Old ministers depart, but
when new men come they come with the old spirit and with the old truth,
or if they come with any other spirit or any other doctrine, they should,
in the degree of the change, be suspected of being other than genuine
successors of the prophets.

Elisha begins his ministry by doing good--that is to say, by healing
the water that was diseased. This appeal to the prophet to do something
for the city of Jericho was itself a tribute to the genuineness of the
prophetic office as exercised by him. It is always beautiful to notice
how great power is associated with the doing of good. What is it to
be a prophet of any age, if the age is not practically benefited by
the exercise of the office? The age does not want ornamental prophets,
nominal prophets, official prophets. The age is crying out for men who
can give it bread, who can heal its water, who can mitigate its sorrows,
who can destroy its oppressions.

By this sign must all prophets live or die. It would have been a poor
thing on the part of Elisha to have shown the mantle of his predecessor
if he could not also show his power. We are only in the apostolic
succession as we are in the apostolic spirit.

We may have all the relics which the apostles left behind--the cloak
that was left at Troas, the parchment, the staff and the vessels out of
which they ate and drank--we may even have the scrolls which they used in
reading the Holy Scriptures; but all these things will constitute only a
burden if we have not, along with all other possessions, the mighty and
eternal Spirit of the living God, without whose energy even the apostles
themselves were but common men.

Elisha, having cured the water, went up from the depressed plain of
Jericho to the top of the highland of Jordan, to the height of three
thousand feet, that he might come unto Beth-el--which, alas, became the
chief stronghold of the calf worship. The popular sentiment was debased
to the lowest possible point; even the little children were tainted with
the awful disease of contempt for the greatest names and the greatest
thoughts in all Israel.

“And he went up from thence to Beth-el; and as he was going up by the
way, there came forth little children out of the city, and mocked him,
and said unto him: ‘Go up, thou bald head! Go up, thou bald head!’ And
he turned back, and looked on them, and cursed them in the name of the
Lord. And there came forth two she bears out of the wood, and tare forty
and two children of them. And he went from thence to Mount Carmel, and
from thence he returned to Samaria.”

This miracle has occasioned no little difficulty to those who read it
only in the letter. It is not a narrow incident which can be regarded
as a mere anecdote and treated, as it were, within the limits of its
own four corners. We must understand the spirit of the age in which
the incident occurred. We must realize that the whole air was full of
idolatry and blasphemy. We must also remember that the very Church of
Israel itself was deceitful above all things and desperately wicked, with
hardly one spot of health on all the altar from the crown of the head to
the sole of the foot. We must keep steadily before our minds the fact
that the places which are mentioned in this incident had become as Sodom
and Gomorrah--not, perhaps, in the physical and carnal sense, but in the
still worse sense of spiritual alienation and spiritual contempt for
every thing associated with the name of the living God.

When Elisha, therefore, wrought this deed of violence--this miracle of
destruction--his action must be regarded typically and as strictly in
keeping with the necessities of the occasion. Only this kind of miracle
could have been understood by the people among whom it was worked and
who had an opportunity of feeling its effects, either directly or
incidentally. How often it happens that the first miracle is one which is
marked peculiarly by a destructive energy!

This would seem to be the miracle which our own first zealous impulses
would work, had they the power to express themselves in such a form. When
the soul is alive with the purity of God, when the heart glows and burns
with love, when the whole being is in vital sympathy with the purposes of
the cross of Christ, the first and all but uncontrollable impulse is to
destroy evil--not to reason with it, or make truce with it, or give it
further treatment of any kind, but instantly and violently to crush it
out of existence.

This impulse will be trained unto other uses in the School of Christ.

We see, in the opening of the sixth chapter of the second Book of Kings,
some of the simple and happy relations which existed between the elder
and the younger prophets.

Is it not possible to revive some of these relations? Look at the case:

“And the sons of the prophets said unto Elisha: ‘Behold, now, the place
where we dwell with thee is too strait for us.’”

Put into modern language, the statement amounts to this: “Our college is
getting too small, and we want more room. Let us, therefore, consider
this practical question, and see what can be done.”

Elisha did not live with the young men. That, perhaps, was rather a happy
than an unhappy circumstance--though a very beautiful picture could be
drawn concerning domestic collegiate life. A college or a school with the
teachers and the students all living together must, one would surely say,
be a little Heaven on Earth. What can be, ideally, more perfect than the
old prophet surrounded by all the younger prophets, eating and living
together, having a common room, a common hostelry--a common home? What
can be, imaginatively, more taking, pathetic and satisfactory?

Without pronouncing a judgment upon that inquiry, it is enough to be
so far just to the text to say that Elisha did not adopt that system
of collegiate life. He went around from place to place; he visited the
schools of the prophets in the various localities, and when he came to
this place the young men said: “We have not room enough; we must consider
our circumstances, and endeavor to enlarge our accommodation.”

What did they propose?

It is well now and again to hear what young men have to suggest. It is
useful to listen to young politicians in national crises, that we may
hear how they would treat the patient. It is most desirable that young
voices should mingle with old voices in the common council.

Now it is the turn of the young men to speak. What will they propose to
Elisha?

The answer is given in the second verse: “Let us go, we pray thee, unto
Jordan, and take thence every man a beam, and let us make a place there
where we may dwell.”

The city was not situated exactly upon the Jordan, but upon a stream a
little way from it, which flowed into that great river; and now the young
men proposed to get a little nearer to the main stream, for the district
of it was called The Valley of Palms.

Palestine was notably destitute of trees, but in this particular locality
timber was to be got. So the young men made the proposition to Elisha.
What does the proposition amount to? It amounts to something which in
this day might horrify a good many of the successors of Elisha.

The young men said: “Let us go and cut down our timber, and enlarge our
college with our own hands.” Did they propose that the question should be
“reported upon”--that it should be brought first under the attention of
the general committee, then be referred to a sub-committee being bound to
make a report to the general committee, and the general committee being
unable to attend, or to constitute a quorum, and so go on to forget the
whole business? The young men said:

“We want room; let us make it. We want a larger college; let us build it.”

Why not adopt the same principle today? There is nothing so easy as to
send around an appeal for a contribution and never get any reply to it.

We, wanting to be missionaries, should go by the next boat; wanting to
preach the Gospel to the heathen, we should ask: “When does the ship
start?” Being unable to pay the fare, we should work our passage. If
people should ask us what we are doing, and whether we have lost our
senses, we should say: “Yes; if we be beside ourselves, it is unto God.”

Then an impression might be made upon those who look on. They would say:
“Surely, these men are in earnest; be they right or be they wrong, be
they fanatical or sober-minded, their earnestness burns in them like a
fire, and such men can neither be put back nor be kept down.”

However, without wishing to modernize the details of this incident,
which, owing to our civilization, would be impossible, it is enough to
remember that, in the early days of collegiate and school life, the
scholars were prepared to do something toward helping themselves. They
did not send for builders from Jerusalem, or even from the city of
Jericho; they undertook the work at their own impulse and at their own
charges.

There is a line of beauty even in the proposition of the young men. They
desired Elisha’s permission. They said, in effect: “Father, may we go?”
They were enthusiastic, but they were under discipline; they had fire
enough, but they responded to the touch of the master. And one said to
Elisha: “Be content, I pray thee, and go with thy servants.” They were
stronger when the elder man was with them.

Sometimes the eye is the best master. It often happens that the man who
is standing in the harvest field, resting upon his rake, a picture of
dignity and ease, is doing more than if he were sweltering himself by
cutting down corn with his own sickle. His eye is doing the work, and his
presence is exerting an immeasurable and happy influence upon the whole
field.

Elisha was not asked to go and fell the timber, but to be with the young
men while they did the hard work; and, becoming young again himself, as
old men do become young when associated with young life, he replied:

“I will go. The work is a common work. It belongs to me as well as to
you; it belongs to all Israel, in so far as all Israel is true to the
living God. Come, let us go in one band; union is strength.”

Now, they went--the old and the young together. Why would they not go
alone? Perhaps they were all reminded of what happened when once they
did go alone. Elisha ordered that food should be prepared, and when the
seething pot was on, one of the young men went out and gathered something
and threw it into the pot, and nearly poisoned the whole college. Small
wonder if one of them, remembering this, said:

“No more going out alone, if you please. We once took the case into our
own hands, and I remember how many of us fell sick, and how we cried
to Elisha: ‘Master, there is death in the pot!’ And he kindly took
up a handful of meal, sprinkled it into the vessel and restored its
healthfulness. The pot was relieved of all the disease which it had
contained, and the meal most happily proceeded.”

We should remember our blunders, and learn from them. We are always safer
in the company of the old and wise than when we are in our own society.
Happy is the man who takes counsel with his elder neighbors, and who can
sometimes renounce himself and say unto wise men: “Such and such are my
circumstances; now, what would you advise me to do?”

Elisha and the young men have now gone down to the Jordan. Elisha felled
no tree but he did his own particular kind of work.

The Syrian king could not rest. In his heart he hated or feared the king
and the hosts of Israel. There was chronic war between Israel and Syria.
The king of Syria said: “I will fix my camp in such and such a place.” Of
this the sacred record says: “And the man of God sent unto the king of
Israel, saying: ‘Beware that thou pass not such a place, for thither the
Syrians are come down.’”

There is a ministry of warning. Men may not go themselves to battle,
and yet they may be controlling the fortunes of war. We need statesmen,
spiritual interpreters, religious teachers, men of thought and men of
prayer; and they may be doing more practical work than is being done
by those who are engaged in the physical work of leading armies and
commanding military hosts.

This is what Elisha did.

He felled no tree; he wielded no sword. Yet, alike in the building of the
college and in the direction of the war, his was the supreme mind. The
prophet saved the king. This must always be the case.

The great man of the nation is the man who can think most profoundly
and most comprehensively. The architect is a greater man than the
builder. The prophet is a greater man than the king. He reads more; he
sees farther; he grasps a larger field. He is master of metaphysical
principles, which alone endure. They wear the clothes of the present
time; they adopt the form of the passing generation, but they go on from
age to age--themselves always the same, their adaptations being addressed
to the immediate and pressing necessities of the people.

We have been told that “Justice is not an intermittent apparition.”
That is perfectly true in one sense; but justice is often a deferred
creditor, and sometimes that may be done tomorrow which can not be justly
done today. The prophet sees all this. He looks ahead; he has a larger
horizon than is accessible to the vision of other men.

So let it stand, an eternal lesson, that the greatest men in any nation
are the men who can think most, pray best, feel most deeply and penetrate
the metaphysics and the inmost reality of politics and of civilization.

Spiritual power is not only useful in one direction; it is alarming in
another. When the king of Syria felt himself baffled, all his plans
thrown into uncontrollable bewilderment, his heart was sorely troubled.
It is the Immeasurable that frightens men. It is the Unknown Quantity
that troubles all their calculations and causes them to feel that after
they have completed their arithmetic their conclusion is a lie.

What was in the air? Whose was this ghostly presence that was upsetting
Ben-hadad’s well laid schemes? What was it, or who, that always went
before him, and that made his proposals abortive and turned all his
policies into mocking nothings?

Had there been any man who was visible and measurable, that man could
have been dealt with. There is always a quantity equal to any quantity
that is known. What is wanting in one way can be made up in another--as,
for example, what is wanting in number may be made up in quality. As one
great leader said in ancient history, when his soldiers were saying they
were too few for the battle: “How many do you count me for?” That touched
the fire of the army, and inspired the soldiers with confidence.

Now, the matter was revealed to the king, and he took means to remove the
spectral influence. He made this arrangement: “Go and spy where he is,
that I may send and fetch him.” When he knew that Elisha was in Dothan
the king sent “thither horses and chariots and a great host.”

What unconscious tributes bad men pay to good influences! Men do not know
wholly what they are doing. Why, this was but a poor prophet, wearing a
hairy robe that had descended to him; he was no king; he had no sword or
horse; he was but a man of prayer. How did Ben-hadad propose to capture
him?

The king sent “horses and chariots and a great host” to take a man whose
sword was the word of God, whose helmet was the defense of the Most High,
whose breastplate was Righteousness!

Here are three arms of the Syrian service--footmen, horsemen and
chariots; and remember that these were all employed to bring one poor man
to the king’s presence. Well might Elisha have said, before Antigonus
uttered it: “How many do you count _me_ for?” Elisha might have taunted
the king of Syria, saying: “Why all this ado? Would not one soldier have
been enough to take one prophet? He might have come on foot; a horse was
not necessary, and certainly not a sword. One soldier might surely have
arrested me.”

But bad men unconsciously pay tribute to good men. They say, in effect:
“Elisha is only one, but a stubborn one; only one tree, but his roots
seem to have spread themselves through the Earth, and to have taken hold
of the entire scheme of things; he is only one, yet, what is strange, he
is many in one.”

And this, indeed, was the interpretation given by Elisha, for he said:
“They that be with us are more than they that be with them.”

Who can tell how many angels are round about the praying man? How is it
that when the arresting hand is laid upon some men it becomes softened,
the muscles relax and have no more pith in them, and the men come back
to say: “Never man spake like this man; arrest him we can not”? This is
a tribute paid to the Christian religion. Men have passed parliamentary
statutes against it, but the religion of the cross has outlived the
statutes--has seen them grow into yellow letters, has observed them being
canceled or otherwise passing into obsoleteness.

We are now brought to a very striking point in the incident. The servant
of Elisha came back, saying: “Alas, my master, how shall we do? I have
been up early, and behold, a host compasses the city--both with horses
and chariots.”

Then Elisha said: “Lord, open his eyes; let this young man see. At
present he can only look upon appearances, which are not realities. The
universe is within the universe. The Bible is within the Bible. The man
is within the man. This servant of mine sees only the outer circle--the
rim or rind of things. Lord, show him the reality; let him see, and then
he will be at peace.”

There is a view of sight; there is a view of faith. The worldly man goes
by what his bodily eyes notice or discern; the spiritually minded man
walks by faith, not by sight.

The telescope does not create the stars; the telescope only reveals them,
or enables the eye to see them. If, then, a telescope can do this, shall
we deny to that spiritual power within us called Faith the power which we
ascribe to a mechanical instrument which our own hands have fashioned?

Look upon a given object--say, you take a piece of glass two inches
square; look upon it and ask: “Is there any thing on that glass?” Looking
with the naked eye, the sharpest man would say: “That glass is perfectly
free from blot, stain, flaw or inscription of any kind whatsoever.”

Now, put that same two-inch square of glass under a microscope, and look
through the microscope. What is upon it? The Lord’s Prayer, upon a speck
not discernible by the naked eye.

If, then, we ascribe such wonderful powers to a glass which we ourselves
have determined as to its size and its relation to other glasses, shall
we deny to a certain spiritual faculty the power of seeing that which can
not be discriminated by unaided reason?

By all the pressure of analogy, by all the reasoning of inference, we
insist that, if such wonderful things can be done mechanically, things at
least equally wonderful can be done by forces that are spiritual.

The Sun does not make the landscape; the Sun only shows it. A man may
stand upon a high hill on a dull-gray day and say: “I can imagine what
this would be when the Sun was shining.” But no man can imagine light. It
stands as a sacred mystery in our life that the Sun never comes within
the lines of imagination. The Sun light is a continual surprise, even to
the eyes that have most reverently and lovingly studied it.

When the Sun looks upon the landscape there are new colors, new
distances, new forms; a whole work is wrought upon the landscape which
can only be described by the word “wizardry.”

So it is with the Bible, the great work of the living God. Look at it
with the natural vision, and you may discover in it particular beauties.
You may say: “The poetry is noble; the English is pure; and the moral
sentiment of the book is not without a certain elevation.”

But the Bible wants no such reluctant or impoverished compliments. Let
the soul be touched by the Spirit that wrote the book; let the eyes be
anointed by the living God; and then the Bible is like a landscape shone
upon by the noonday’s cloudless Sun.

Elisha took his own way with the Syrian army, and here occurs a point
worthy of special note. When the Lord smote the people with blindness,
according to the word of Elisha, the latter said unto them: “This is not
the way, neither is this the city; follow me, and I will bring you to the
man whom ye seek.” But he led them to Samaria.

What! Then did the man of God resort to a false strategy? This is a very
serious case, indeed, and has occasioned much difficulty. Nor need we
wonder, for in “The Speaker’s Commentary” we find such words as these:

“Untruth has been held by all moralists to be justifiable toward a public
enemy. Where we have a right to kill, much more have we a right to
deceive by stratagem.”

When words like these occur in a Christian commentary, no wonder that
infidelity should seize upon the annotation as a prize, or use it as a
weapon. No such comment can we adopt in perusing this portion of sacred
Scripture. It can not be justifiable to treat a public enemy by untruth
or deception. We have no right to kill, and therefore we have no right to
deceive by stratagem. This is not the way to recommend the word of the
living God.

The incident must be taken in its totality. The reader must not arrest
the progress of the narrative by stopping here or there to ask a
question. He must see the incident in its completeness, and, seeing it,
he will have reason further to glorify God for the pure morality of the
book and the noble spirit of the record.

Elisha might well so far follow his illustrious predecessor as to use the
weapon of irony or taunting in dealing with the Lord’s enemies.

Elijah said to the prophets of Baal: “Cry aloud; for he is a god.” As
well might we stop there, and say: “By Elijah’s own testimony deity was
ascribed to Baal.” We forget the irony of the tone; we forget that Elijah
was mocking the debased prophets.

So Elisha might say: “This is not the way, neither is this the city;
follow me, and I will bring you to the man whom ye seek.”

There was a taunt in the tone; there was sarcasm in the emphasis. Nor is
the verse to be read in its unity. It is to be read as part and parcel of
a whole narrative.

Now, what became of all this so-called deception and stratagem?

When the people were come into Samaria, Elisha said: “Lord, open the
eyes of these men, that they may see.”

He prayed, first, that their sight might be taken away. That seemed to be
cruel. Now he prays that their sight may be given to them again.

“And, behold, they were in the midst of Samaria. And the king of Israel
said unto Elisha, when he saw them: ‘My father!’” As if he had become
a convert. The son of Ahab and Jezebel said to Elisha: “My father!” A
reluctant and hypocritical compliment, for Jehoram could be neither
reverent or true.

But, said he, observing the prize that was before him: “Shall I smite
them? Shall I smite them?” This was a Hebraism equal to: “Smiting, shall
I smite?” So Jehoram said: “Shall I, smiting, smite them?”

Elisha answered: “No.”

Now, let us hear what this man can say who has been judged guilty of
untruth and of stratagem.

Elisha said to Jehoram: “Thou shalt not smite them. Wouldst thou smite
those whom thou hast taken captive without thy sword and without thy
bow?” This is the same as saying: “If you yourself have won the victory,
then you can smite; but you did not take these men, and therefore you
shall not smite them. What you have taken by your own sword and spear may
be your lawful prize in war; but here is a capture with which you have
had nothing to do.”

What, then, is to be done? Hear Elisha: “Set bread and water before them,
that they may eat and drink and go to their master.”

And so great provision was prepared, “and when they had eaten and drunk,
he sent them away, and they went to their master.”

We might even excuse a strategic act in order to secure such a conclusion.

Elisha was supposed to be about a hundred years of age when he died. We
have seen that he was a domestic rather than a public prophet. He was
unlike his great predecessor and father. The awful Elijah dwelt alone.
He came upon society now and then--came down like a flood from the
threatening clouds; shot out like a fire, and burned the men whom he
approached.

Elisha was exactly the contrary. He worked his miracles in the house.
He often called upon people; he was quiet, serene, most sympathetic and
tender-hearted. Now and then he could stand bolt upright and send away
proud men from his door with a disdain that they could never forget; but
in the usual process of his life he was a mother-man in Israel. He went
into people’s houses and asked how they were. He consented to increase
their oil and their flour, and to bless their family life with prophetic
benedictions.


GEHAZI.

The name Gehazi means “valley of vision,” and is appropriate enough if we
think of what Gehazi saw as to the nature of wickedness when the prophet
opened his eyes.

Let us note what points there are in this case which illustrate human
life as we now know it. In this way we shall test the moral accuracy of
the story--and that is all we are now principally concerned about.

Gehazi was “the servant of Elisha, the man of God.” Surely, then, he
would be a good man? Can a good man have a bad servant? Can the man of
prayer, whose life is a continual breathing unto God of supreme desires
after holiness, have a man in his company, looking on and watching him,
and studying his character, who denies his very altar and blasphemes
against his God? Is it possible to live in a Christian house and yet not
be a Christian? Can we come so near as that, and yet be at an infinite
distance from all that is pure and beautiful and true?

If so, then we must look at appearances more carefully than we have been
wont to do, for they may have been deceiving us all the time.

Surely, every good man’s children must be good, for they have had great
spiritual advantages. They have, indeed, had some hereditary benefits
denied to many others. Their house has been a home, their home has been a
church, and surely they must show by their whole spirit and tone of life
that they are as their father as to all spiritual aspiration and positive
excellence.

Is it not so?

If facts contradict that theory, then we must look at the theory again
more carefully, or we must examine the facts more closely, because
the whole science of Cause and Effect would seem to be upset by such
contradictions. There is a metaphysical question here, as well as a
question of fact. A good tree must bring forth good fruit; good men must
have good children; good masters must have good servants. Association in
life must go for something.

So we would say--emphatically, because we think reasonably.

But facts are against such a fancy.

What is possible in this human life? It is possible that a man may spend
his days in building a church, and yet denying God. Does not the very
touch of the stones help him to pray? No. He touches them roughly; he
lays them mechanically, and he desecrates each of them with an oath.

Is it possible that a man can be a builder of churches and yet be a
destroyer of Christian doctrine and teaching generally? Yes.

Let us come closer still, for the question is intensely interesting and
may touch many.

It is possible for a man to print the Bible and yet not believe a word
of it. On first hearing this shocking statement we revolt from it. We
say it is possible for a man to handle type that is meant to represent
the greatest revelation ever made to the human mind without feeling that
the very handling of the type is itself a kind of religious exercise.
Yet men can debauch themselves in the act of printing the Bible; can use
profane language while putting the Lord’s Prayer in type; can set up the
whole Gospel of John without knowing that they are putting into visible
representation the highest metaphysics, the finest spiritual thinking,
the most tender religious instruction.

Let us come even closer. A man can preach the Gospel and be a servant of
the devil. Who, then, can be saved? It is well to ask the question. It is
a burning inquiry; it is a spear-like interrogation. We would put it away
from us if we dare.

Now, let this stand as our first lesson in the study of this remarkable
incident, that Gehazi was the servant of Elisha, the man of God, and was
at the same time the servant of the devil. He was receiving wages from
both masters. He was a living contradiction; and in being such he was
most broadly human. He was not a monster; he was not a natural curiosity;
he is not to be accounted for by quietly saying that he was an eccentric
person. He represents the human heart, and by so much he brings against
ourselves an infinite impeachment.

It is in vain that we shake our skirts as if throwing off this man and
all association with him and responsibility for him; this can not be
done. He anticipated ourselves; we repeat his wickedness. The iniquity
is not in the accident, in the mere circumstances, or in the particular
form; the iniquity is in the heart--yea, in the very heart itself. Marvel
not that Christ said: “Ye must be born again.”

Gehazi did not understand the spirit of his master. He did not know what
his master was doing. How is it that men can be so far separated from one
another? How is it that a man can not be understood in his own house, but
be thought fanciful, fanatical, eccentric and phenomenally peculiar? How
is it that a man may be living among men, and yet not be of them; may be
in the world and yet above the world; may be speaking the very language
of the time, and yet charging it with the meaning of eternity? See here
the differences that still exist, and must ever exist, as between one man
and another:

Elisha--living the great spiritual life, the grand prayer-life and
faith-life.

Gehazi--grubbing in the Earth and seeking his contentment in the dust.

These contrasts exist through all time, and are full of instruction.
Blessed is he who observes the wise man, and copies him; who looks upon
the fool, and turns away from him, if not with hatred yet with a desire
not to know his spirit.

Gehazi had a method in his reasoning. Said he, in effect:

“To spare a stranger, a man who may never be seen again; to spare a
beneficiary, a man who has taken away benefits in the right hand and
in the left; to spare a wealthy visitor, a man who could have given
much without feeling he had given any thing; to spare a willing giver,
a man who actually offered to give something and who was surprised, if
not offended, because his gift was declined! There is no reason in my
master’s policy.”

It never occurred to Gehazi that a man could have bread to eat that the
world knew not of. It never occurs to some men that others can live by
faith, and can work miracles of faith by the grace of God.

Are there not minds that never had a noble thought? It is almost
impossible to conceive of the existence of such minds, but there they
are. They never went beyond their own limited location; they never knew
what suffering was on the other side of the wall of their own dwelling
place. They were never eyes to the blind, or ears to the deaf, or feet
to the lame; they never surprised themselves by some noble thought of
generosity. How, then, can they understand the prophets of the times?

Yet how noble a thing it is to have among us men who love the upper life,
and who look upon the whole world from the very sanctuary of God, and who
say:

“A man’s life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he
possesseth, but a man’s life consists of his faith, love and charity.”

We can not tell how much the prophets are doing to refine their age, to
give a new view to all human duty, to inspire those who otherwise would
fail for the lack of courage.

We can not tell where the answers to prayer fall, or how those answers
are given, but we feel that there is at work in society a mystic
influence, a strange, ghostly, spectral action, which keeps things
together, and now and again puts Sabbath day right in the midst of the
vulgar time.

There are facts of a high and special kind, as well as what we commonly
call facts, which are often but appearances and dramatic illusions. What
about the secret ministry, the unnamable spiritual action, the holy,
elevating and restraining influence? What is that hand which will write
upon palace walls words of judgment and keep the world from plunging into
darkness infinite?

Surely, God is in this place, and I knew it not. This--wherever it be,
garden or wilderness--is none other than the house of God and the gate of
Heaven.

Gehazi prostituted an inventive and energetic mind. He had his plan: “My
master hath sent me, saying: ‘Behold, even now there be come to me from
Mount Ephraim two young men of the sons of the prophets. Give them, I
pray thee, a talent of silver and two changes of garments.”

The case was admirably stated. It was stated, too, with just that urgency
which increases the likelihood of that which is declared.

Elisha spent his time among the sons of the prophets. They all looked to
him as a father, as he had once looked to Elijah. He was the young man’s
friend--the young minister’s asylum. They all knew the gracious, gentle,
Christ-like Elisha--the ante-type of the Messiah; and what was more
likely than that two of them, in the course of their journeying, should
have called on Elisha unexpectedly?

It was a free and gracious life that the old ministers lived. They seemed
to have rights in one another. If any one of them had a loaf, that
loaf belonged to the whole fraternity. If one of them, better off than
another, had a house or part of a house, any of the sons of the prophets
passing by could go and lodge there.

It was a gracious masonry--a true brotherhood.

Gehazi was no model man in a moral sense. His invention was a lie; his
cleverness was but an aspect of depravity; his very genius but made him
memorable for wickedness.

But Gehazi was successful. He took the two talents of silver in the two
bags, with the two changes of garments. He brought them to the tower, and
bestowed them in the house. Then he sat down--a successful man! Now all
is well; lust is satisfied, wealth is laid up. Now the fitness of things
has been consulted, and harmony has been established between debtor and
creditor, and Justice nods because Justice has been appeased.

Were the test to end with the twenty-fourth verse of the fifth chapter of
the second Book of Kings, we should describe Gehazi as a man who had set
an example to all coming after him who wished to turn life into a success.

Who had been wronged?

Naaman pursues his journey all the more happy for thinking he has done
something in return for the great benefit which has been conferred on
him. He is certainly more pleased than otherwise. The man of God has at
last been turned, he thinks, into directions indicated by common sense.

All this has come about in the way of business; for nothing that is not
customary has been done.

Gehazi is satisfied, and Elisha knows nothing about it. The servant
should have something, even if the master would take nothing. It is
the trick of our own day. The servant is always at the door with his
rheumatic hand, ready to take any thing that may be put into it. We leave
nothing with the master; it would be an insult to him.

So far the case looks simple, natural and complete; and we have said
Elisha knows nothing about it.

Why will men trifle with prophets?

Why will men play with fire?

When will men know that what is done in secret will be published on the
house tops?

When will men know that there can be nothing confidential that is wicked?

Observe Gehazi going in to his master as usual, and look at his face;
not a sign upon it of any thing having been done that is wrong. Look at
his hands--large, white, innocent-looking hands that never doubled their
fingers on things that did not belong to them.

Look at Elisha. Fixing his eyes calmly upon Gehazi, he asks:

“Whence comest thou, Gehazi?”

“Thy servant went no whither.”

Gehazi meant it to be understood that he had been on the premises all the
time; always within call; the lifting up of a finger would have brought
him.

Then came the speech of judgment, delivered in a low tone, but every word
was heard--the beginning of the word and the end of the word--and the
last word was like a sting of righteousness.

“Went not mine heart with thee?”

Oh, that heart! The good man knows when wickedness has been done. Christ
knows when He enters into the congregation whether there is a man in it
with a withered hand.

“Went not mine heart with thee?” Was I not present at the interview? Did
I not hear every syllable that was said on the one side and on the other?
Did I not look at thee when thou didst tell the black, flat and daring
lie?

Then came the infliction of the judgment:

“The leprosy, therefore, of Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and unto thy
seed for ever.”

Thou, Gehazi, hast touched the silver, not knowing that it was contagious
and held the leprosy; thou didst bring in the two changes of garments,
not knowing that the germs of the disease were folded up with the cloth.
Put on the coat; it will scorch thee.

“He went out from his presence a leper as white as snow.”

A splendid conception is this silent departure. Not a word was said,
not a protest uttered. The judgment was felt to be just. “Cast ye the
unprofitable servant into outer darkness.” “These shall go away into
everlasting punishment.”

Oh, the hush--the solemn silence! The judgment seemed to begin with the
sound of trumpets and the rending of things that apparently could not
be shaken; at the end there is simply a going away, a silent motion, a
conviction that the sentence is right.

See Gehazi as he goes out of Elisha’s presence, and regard him as a
specimen of those who, having been judged, on the last day will depart.

Men should consider the price which they really pay for their success.

The grateful Syrian would gladly have pressed upon Elisha gifts of high
value, but the holy man resolutely refused to take any thing, lest the
glory redounding unto God from this great act should in any degree be
obscured. But his servant, Gehazi, was less scrupulous, and hastened with
a lie in his mouth to ask, in his master’s name, for a portion of that
which Elisha had refused.

The illustrious Syrian no sooner saw the man running after his chariot
than he alighted to meet him, and being glad to relieve himself in some
degree under the sense of overwhelming obligation, he sent him back with
more than he ventured to ask.

Nothing more is known of Naaman.

We afterward find Gehazi recounting to King Joram the great deeds of
Elisha, and in the providence of God it so happened that when he was
relating the restoration to life of the Shunnammite’s son, the very woman
with her son appeared before the king to claim her house and lands, which
had been usurped while she had been absent abroad during the recent
famine. Struck by the coincidence, the king immediately granted her
application.

As lepers were compelled to live apart outside the towns, and were not
allowed to come too near to uninfected persons, some difficulty has
arisen with respect to Gehazi’s interview with the king. Several answers
occur. The interview may have taken place outside the town, in a garden
or garden house, and the king may have kept Gehazi at a distance, with
the usual precautions which custom dictated. Some even suppose that the
incident is misplaced, and actually occurred before Gehazi was smitten
with leprosy. Others hasten to the opposite conclusion, and allege the
probability that the leper had then repented of his crime, and had been
restored to health by his master.


HEZEKIAH.

So far in our Bible studies we have had many weary wanderings among bad
men. The fear was that, to some extent, familiarity with them might
blunt our own moral sensibility.

Man after man has passed before us out of whose very countenance
the image of God had faded. How pleasant it is, and how spiritually
exhilarating, to come upon a case in which we read of a different pattern
of man! Of Hezekiah it is recorded in the eighteenth chapter of the
second Book of Kings:

“And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to
all that David, his father, did.”

After a long journey underground we seem to have come suddenly upon a
sweet garden, and the sight of it is as Heaven. The charm is always in
the contrast. If things are not quite so good as we supposed them to
be, they are all the better by reason of circumstances through which we
have passed, which have made us ill at ease and have impoverished or
disheartened us; then very little of the other kind goes a long way.

A man comes up out of the underground railway and says, when he emerges
into the light:

“How fresh the air is here! What a healthy locality! How well to live in
this neighborhood!”

Why does he speak so kindly of his surroundings? Not because of those
surroundings intrinsically, but because of the contrast which they
present to the circumstances through which he has just passed.

Hezekiah was no perfect man.

We shall see how noble he was, and how rich in many high qualities, yet
how now and again we see the crutch of the cripple under the purple of
the king.

It is well for us that he was occasionally and temporarily weak, or he
would have been like a star which we can not touch, and at which we can
not light our own torch.

Even Hezekiah was a man like ourselves in many particulars, and therefore
what was good and sound in him is all the more attractive and is all the
more possible to us.

Who can mistake an honest man?

If all men were upright, where would be the peculiarity of any individual
man’s integrity? But, given a corrupt state of society, when the
honest man appears we say: “The wind has changed. It blows balmily and
healthfully. It comes from a fine origin, and brings with it many a
blessing.”

Who can mistake the atmosphere of the sea? How it blows away all the city
dullness! How it quickens the blood! How it throws off increasing years,
and makes the voyager feel almost young again!

It is so with honesty, nobleness, charity and goodness of character when
the surrounding air is charged with some kind of poison or pestilence.

So it is that we come upon Hezekiah.

Perhaps it is well for him that we approach his case after such an
experience. He thus gets advantages that otherwise might not have been
accorded to him. He looks the higher for the dwarfs that are round about
him, the whiter because of the black population amid which he stands--at
once a contrast and a rebuke.

But from Hezekiah’s point of view the case was different. Behind him
were traditions of the most corrupt sort. He was as a speckled bird
in the line of his own family. It is hard to be good amid so much
that is really bad. All attempts at goodness are accounted examples of
affectation, conceit, vanity and pharisaism; and under such circumstances
sometimes a man’s foes may be the people of his own household. They wish
he was more pliable, less sabbatarian, less devoted to his Bible, less
constant in his attendance at church. He might go once a day, and give
himself one end of the rope not tethered to the altar; but he will not.

Has that man an easy time of it?

No hard word may be spoken to him--certainly no bitter word--and yet
all the while he may be made to feel that perhaps, after all, he may be
affecting somewhat of piety and purity, and that those who are looking on
may be better critics of him than he is of himself.

At all events, there come to him periods of trial, and sometimes he says
within himself:

“Shall I today be as constant as I have been, or may I not break away
now? Have I not built up a character, and may I not retire upon my moral
competence, and live henceforth the life of a latitudinarian? After a
long spell of many years, surely I might intermit just a little.”

Who shall say that the temptation is not subtle and strong? Some men
have to force their way to church through innumerable and unnamable
difficulties. This ought to be reckoned. Some credit must be due to
men who are thus constant to their sense of public duty and religious
obligation. Men are not always at church with the entire consent of those
who are round about them.

What, then, must be done?

One of two things. Either yield to the temptation or resist it. You can
not trifle with it. You can not compromise, and then recur to firmness,
and again connive, and again balance, consider and hesitate. Virtue is
not an intermittent grace. We must stand, or we must fall.

Hezekiah had a wicked father. How will that wickedness come out in the
son? Not, perhaps, as wickedness, but as infirmity, weakness, and want of
constancy in some directions, though there may be no want of firmness in
others.

Can a man wholly escape the bad blood inherited of his father?

We must not forget that Hezekiah’s mother’s name was Abi, the daughter of
Zachariah. How she came to marry a wicked husband must remain a mystery.
But the mother will come up in the son.

She was the daughter of Zachariah, and Zachariah was a prophet, or
seer--a man with double sight--one of those strange men who can see
beyond the merely visible and palpable, and can read things that lie
behind.

Zachariah came up again in his daughter, and the mother came up again in
the son, and so there was a mysterious play of inheritance, transfer,
transition, reappearance, somewhat of resurrection--a great tragic
mystery of transformation and representation.

We speak about a man as if he were self-contained--just standing upon
so much ground, without relation behind or before, on the right hand or
on the left. But no man is thus insularly placed; no man is an absolute
solitary.

Every man has in him the blood of the past and the life of the future.

Can a son of a good mother be altogether bad? Most surely not. You must
have mistaken the case if you thought so. Your very thinking so may
constitute an element of hopefulness in your case. Take comfort from that
suggestion.

So long as you can think of yourself seriously and of the past and of
your advantages, and can compare what you are with what you might have
been, there is hope of you.

But can there be in all history such an irony as this, that a man should
have had a praying mother and himself be a prayerless man?

No! It can not be. Somewhere--at some time and in some way--the better
nature will assert itself, and out of a good seed surely there will come
a good harvest.

But the lesson does not lie upon one side only. Here is encouragement to
the praying fathers and to praying mothers.

Zachariah, read on; read between the lines of things; interpret events
symbolically; read the apocalyptic sense of what is happening--and out of
all this mental elevation and spiritual conduct there will come results
in your daughter or your son.

Abi, pray on. Be just to your father’s memory, and say: “He was a holy
man. I must prove it by being a holy woman. He can not live upon a
written character; he must live in my life. I will prove that such a
child must have had a good father.”

So the vital lessons fall--on the right hand, on the left, and
around about us. Shame be to us if, amid this shower of monition and
encouragement and stimulus, we be deaf and dumb and blind, unfeeling,
unresponsive.

Hezekiah will now go to work and prove himself to be an energetic
reformer.

“He removed the high places, and brake the images, and cut down the
groves, and brake in pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had made; for
unto those days the children of Israel did burn incense to it; and he
called it Nehustan.”

He must have been a strong man. He had no colleague, no ally; no one to
say to him: “Be brave, be true.” He went straight against the hardest
wall that ever was built by the stubbornness and perversity of man.

It is not easy to begin life by a destructive process of reformation.
Who would not rather plant a tree than throw down a wall? Who would not
rather plant flowers and enjoy their beauty and fragrance than give
himself the severe toil and the incessant trouble of destroying corrupt
and evil institutions?

Whoever attempts this kind of destructive work, or even a constructive
work which involves preliminary destructiveness, will have a hard time of
it. Criticism will be very sharp, and selfishness will be developed in an
extraordinary degree.

If a man be more than politician--if he be a real born statesman, looking
at whole empires at once and not at mere parishes, and if in his thought
and purpose he should base his whole policy upon fundamental right--he
will not have an easy life of it, even in a Christian country. In
proportion as he bases his whole policy on righteousness, temperance and
judgment to come, he will be pelted with hard names and struck at with
unfriendly hands.

This holds good in all departments of life, in all great reformations, in
all assaults made upon ignorance, selfishness, tyranny and wrong of every
name.

The children of Israel always seemed to live a foolish life. They were
the veriest children--so, at least, we would say but for fear of branding
sweet children with an evil stigma.

They were infantile, weak, treacherous to themselves, uncertain at every
point--and so, having kept the brazen serpent, they burned incense to
it. They liked a visible God. When the calf appealed to their religious
feelings they danced around it as if at last they had found a deity.

But who can worship a spirit--invisible, impalpable, far away, near at
hand, without a name, without a shape which we can verify and say: “It
comes to thus much, and this is the weight and this is the value of it?”

It requires a mind of some mental strength to stand up, take hold of the
brazen serpent and call it “Nehushtan”--a contemptuous term, meaning a
piece of brass; dead brass, useless and worthless brass, a relic but not
a God.

Let us give credit to the men who have been bold--religiously
intrepid--in the midst of circumstances of a most discouraging and
overbearing kind. They are the men to whom we owe our present privileges.
We have the Bible in our mother tongue because they were valiant. Not a
church would have been built today in which men could assemble with a
sense of freedom--sweet, joyous liberty--but for the Hezekiahs and others
who went forth and, at great cost and great peril, destroyed things evil
and black, by the power of God’s almightiness--overthrew them, and set up
a better kingdom.

What was the root of Hezekiah’s character? At present we have seen
phenomena of a gracious kind; we like what we have seen of this man.

“He trusted in the Lord God of Israel; so that after him was none like
him among all the kings of Judah nor any that were before him. For he
clave to the Lord, and departed not from following Him, but kept His
commandments, which the Lord commanded Moses.”

At length a man arose who said: “I will do God’s will, God helping me. I
will not only read the commandments, but I will incarnate them. I will
not only speak religious words, but live a religious life.”

Tender and yet emphatic are the words: “He trusted,” “he clave,” “he
kept.”

He “trusted”--that is to say, he had no other trust. His religion was
not a convenience, one thing among many things, an occasional exercise
in piety; but it was a perpetual confidence, the one trust, the
all-centralizing and all-ruling fact.

Then he “clave”--he kept close to. He would not allow any thing to come
between his hand and the God he seized. The hand could do nothing except
cleave to God and what was possible through that cleaving; and much is
possible of a helpful and beneficent kind.

He “kept the commandments”--counted them one by one; examined himself
in them; took himself daily to task about the whole ten. We live an
off-hand life.

Religion is now as easy as a wave of the hand, a salutation across a
thoroughfare; it is something that can be taken up, laid down, forgotten
and resumed.

What wonder if the Rab-shakehs of the age come and taunt us, mock our
piety and blow back our prayers before they get to the skies?

We want more trust, more cleaving piety, more keeping of the
commandments, living in them and having no other life that is not
consonant with them.

Now came, as we have often seen, the inevitable temptation. We pass
instantly to the visit of Rab-shakeh. This Rab-shakeh was an eloquent
man. He had the gift of mockery; he could gibe well. He was not without a
certain logical qualification.

He made a long and offensive speech to the people under Hezekiah’s rule,
and he thought he had them at both ends of the argument.

Having mocked their piety, laughed it down, challenged it, spat upon it,
he said:

“Perhaps you will say: ‘We trust in the Lord, our God,’ but you forget
that this very man, Hezekiah, has thrown down His altars, has taken away
His groves, has rooted up the house of your God by the foundations.”

Rab-shakeh did not understand the destructive reformation wrought out by
Hezekiah. He heard of the groves being cut down and the holy places being
removed, and he said:

“This is so much to our advantage. The king of Assyria shall hear of
this, and we shall make good commerce of it.”

Rab-shakeh did not distinguish between idolatry and piety--between a
reform essential to health and a mere accident in history. That which was
good in Hezekiah seemed to be wickedness to Rab-shakeh.

Rab-shakeh assaulted the people, trampled on them, leaped over their
bodies, mocked their refuges and their trust, and thrust his fist into
the face of Egypt and said:

“Come away from Hezekiah. Trust him not; he is blind; he is incapable.
Leave him, and I will tell you what the king of Assyria will do for you.”

And he held this out to them:

“I will come and take you away to a land like your own land--a land of
corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of olive oil and of
honey--that ye may live, and not die; and hearken not unto Hezekiah, when
he persuadeth you, saying: ‘The Lord will deliver us.’”

It is but an empty saying: “Come, and I will give you a great Canaan!”

Sometimes it does seem as if the enemy had the best of it. Every thing
lies so handily to him. He says:

“I will get you through this difficulty. I know a lie that would deceive
a king. I can instruct you in a policy that would blind a judge. I could
get the money for you; you need have no difficulty about that. Why, I
say, in confidence, I can let you have it now!”

What can the preacher do in the presence of such a Rab-shakeh?

Or, he may not offer temptation in that direction, but in another. He may
say:

“All these arguments I could answer, if I cared to do so. Who wrote
the Bible? Who has seen the original manuscripts? Who has ever seen
God? It is utterly impossible to know the infinite. Come, and I will
make you rich at once in real, solid, practical things. I can give you
work instantly, and wages immediately the work is begun. I can give you
something in advance. Leave the preacher, the altar, the Bible and the
church. Come and work in the open streets, and be doing something that
you can handle and about which there is no manner of doubt.”

People begin then to wonder.

They should adopt the policy which was imposed on the children of
Hezekiah:

“But the people held their peace, and answered him not a word, for the
king’s commandment was: ‘Answer him not.’”

Nothing is to be got out of wordy controversy. Live the Christian life;
grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. While the
controversialist is contemning you, taunting you and smiting you, show
to him that you are growing broader, more massive in character, more
tender in disposition, more benevolent in every aspiration and desire and
purpose, and thus by well-doing “Put to silence the ignorance of foolish
men.”

Defend your Christianity by the eloquence of your life.

The servants of Hezekiah said to him: “What Rab-shakeh has said may come
to pass. Let us go to Isaiah and tell him all.”

Hezekiah himself thought that perhaps there might be something in it,
after all. There he and his servants fell into a state of incertitude.

“So the servants of King Hezekiah came to Isaiah.” They came to the right
man. Standing up like a king, he said:

“Thus shall ye say to your master: Thus saith the Lord: ‘Be not afraid of
the words which thou hast heard, with which the servants of the king of
Assyria have blasphemed Me. Behold, I will send a blast upon him, and he
shall hear a rumor, and shall return to his own land; and I will cause
him to fall by the sword in his own land.’”

He would make no violent attack on the men. He would summon no legion of
angels to overwhelm this great Oriental potentate. He would simply “send
a blast.” He would change the wind; he would scatter something upon it
and bid it blow across the brain of the king of Assyria, and the king
would not know his right hand from his left, nor the morning from the
night; he would be calling everybody by the wrong name, and be asking for
things that he did not wish to possess, and be, generally, thrown into a
state of unbalanced and wandering mind.

“I will send a whisperer to him. He shall simply go to the ear of the
king of Assyria and say something, and the king will take fright and fly
away in a panic. O Hezekiah, continue thy prayer, repeat thy morning
sacrifice and thine evening oblation; and, as for the king of Assyria, I
will send a blast and a rumor. I will answer Rab-shakeh.”

Let the contempt of the enemy be answered by the contempt of Heaven.

Rab-shakeh, having found that the king of Assyria was warring against
Libnah, returned; and when he heard that Tirhakah, king of Ethiopia, was
come up to war, he once more addressed Hezekiah in terms of exultation
and contempt.

Rab-shakeh was pretendedly anxious that Hezekiah should not be deceived
by the Lord, his God, and then he taunts him with many a history in which
Assyria had been conqueror over opposing nations. He completes his taunt
by asking:

“Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arpad, and the king of the
city of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and Ivah?”

This message came to Hezekiah in the form of a letter, or letters, and he
instantly “went up into the house of the Lord, and spread it before the
Lord.”

There is no need to regard this as in any sense involving a heathenish
custom. The meaning simply is that Hezekiah consulted the Lord on the
whole matter, and declined to take any thing into his own counsel or
power. He acknowledges the dignity of God by the expression: “O Lord God
of Israel, which dwellest between the cherubims.”

Then he pointed to the letter which more immediately concerned himself,
thus showing his consciousness that the majesty of the Lord did not
separate Him from taking an interest in earthly things. We are not to
stop at the point of majesty, but are to reason that, because God is so
majestic and august, He will pay attention to the prayers and desires of
the beings whom He has created in His own image and likeness. The divine
majesty is not a rebuke to human approach, but is an encouragement to
human prayer. When Hezekiah says “Thou art the God,” the emphasis is to
be laid on the pronoun. Thou art the true God, and Thou alone. When he
desires God to bow down His ear, and hear, the reference is not so much
to listen to Hezekiah’s prayer as to the words of Sennacherib.

The meaning of the whole petition may be:

“Interpose immediately and energetically between me and mine enemy. Let
Thine ears hear, let Thine eyes see, and let Thine arm be extended.”

Hezekiah acknowledges that the kings of Assyria had destroyed the nations
and their lands, and had cast the gods of the nations into the fire. By
so much he gives the Assyrians credit for having spoken the truth, and
for having thus founded their project against Israel upon the success
which they had already attained.

Hezekiah acknowledges, indeed, that the gods of the nations were no gods.
At the same time he feels that to the minds of the Assyrians they may
have been as real deities, and their overthrow may have encouraged the
Assyrians to believe that Jehovah was like unto them.

Thus the prayer of Hezekiah was argued and ordered in logical and
historical form, and was intended to excite, as it were, the very
jealousy of the Lord God of Israel.

We now turn to the reply which was made to Hezekiah through the lips of
Isaiah, the son of Amos. The reply was manifestly given in a contemptuous
tone:

“The virgin the daughter of Zion hath despised thee, and laughed thee to
scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at thee.”

This is a poetic personification of place, Zion being regarded as mother
of the people dwelling there. While the term “virgin” may denote the
inviolable security of the citadel of Jehovah, it may also intimate that
a woman--even a solitary woman--was enough, when under the inspiration
and protection of God, to repel the assault of the most boastful and
audacious king.

The expression, “hath shaken her head at thee,” has been literally
rendered: “Hath nodded behind thee.” It signifies an act of security--as,
for example, in the Twenty-second Psalm: “All they that see me laugh
me to scorn; they shoot out the lip, they shake the head, saying: ‘He
trusted on the Lord that He would deliver him. Let Him deliver him,
seeing He delighted him.’”

The people of Jerusalem are represented by this expression as nodding
their heads in contempt at the retiring envoys of Sennacherib.

The answer of Isaiah to Hezekiah was a religious revelation to the king
of Assyria.

The twenty-second verse puts into interrogative form a reproach against
the ignorance of the king:

“Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? And against whom hast thou
exalted thy voice and lifted up thine eyes on high?”

The meaning evidently is that the king did not know the real nature of
the God of Israel and Judah, and that he was making an infinite mistake
in confounding that nature with what he had already seen of the idols of
the nations.

Humiliation is promised to the king of Assyria. A hook is to be thrust
into his nose, a bridle is to be put on his lips, and he is to be turned
back by the way which he came.

While the king of Assyria is humiliated, the remnant that escaped of the
house of Judah is promised again to take root downward and bear fruit
upward--literally, shall add root to root, shall take firmer root than
ever, as a tree often does after a storm; the ravaged land was to be
newly stocked by the remnant that was to be saved out of Jerusalem.

All these statements are supported by the declaration: “The zeal of the
Lord of Hosts shall do this.”

Thus the promise is not made in any human name or guaranteed by the
conquests of human history. It is immediately connected with the very
purpose and power of the Most High. Nor is this the only instance in
which divine strength is promised on behalf of Judah and of Israel. We
read: “For I will defend this city, to save it, for mine own sake, and
for my servant David’s sake.”

We must always be careful to notice that the race is not to the swift,
nor the battle to the strong, and that no occasion is ever given
for man to glory in man, but that everywhere from the beginning of
religious history, as given in the Bible, it is God who is King, Ruler
and Protector, and to Him all the glory of deliverance and conquest
undividedly belongs.

And that night “the angel of the Lord went out and smote in the camp of
the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand; and when they arose
early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses.”

Again and again we say: “It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
the living God.”

Let Rab-shakeh talk--let him deliver his burning messages--and when he
has ceased his mockery it is not necessary for us to answer. God will
defend His own cause.

Here we stand. We think all history is on the Christian side. But let
us not forget that the finest argument in favor of Christianity is a
Christian life.


JABEZ.

The ninth verse of the fourth chapter of the first Book of Chronicles
contains a reference to Jabez. The whole history is brief:

“And Jabez was more honorable than his brethren; and his mother called
his name Jabez, saying: ‘Because I bear him with sorrow.’ And Jabez
called on the God of Israel, saying: ‘Oh, that Thou wouldst bless me
indeed, and enlarge my coast, and that Thine hand might be with me, and
that Thou wouldst keep me from evil, that it may not grieve me!’ And God
granted him that which he requested.”

Nothing more is known of this Jabez or of his brethren. “The Speaker’s
Commentary” regards the fact as remarkable that Jabez should be
introduced without description or patronymic, as if a well-known
personage, and supposes that he was known to those for whom the Book of
Chronicles was written, either by tradition or by writings which have
perished.

The word Jabez signifies sorrowful.

Jabez was distinguished in some way above his brethren. By this
distinction we are not to infer the exercise of an undue partiality in
the spirit of his parents. Account for it as we may, some men appear to
be born with what may be called a larger religiousness of nature than
other men. It is easy for them to pray; it is a delight to them to peruse
all sacred writings; it is a positive pain to them to be deprived of
religious privileges.

We must leave this mystery as insoluble. It is a very pleasant mystery to
those who are gifted with religious intuition; but, on the other hand,
it is a most appalling mystery to those who seem to be what we can not
better describe than by calling them natural Atheists.

The name which Jabez bore was a memorial of his mother’s sorrow--not
a prophecy of his own. Yet Jabez was animated by that inexplicable
superstition which discovers in names and circumstances omens and
predictions which the imagination can never treat with disregard.

Jabez might intellectually know that his name did but represent what his
mother had endured, yet a subtle feeling took possession of him, as if he
himself would in some way be involved in the same sorrow. Nor was this an
irrational conclusion.

As a matter of fact, some men are born to more sorrow than others--as
certainly as by constitution some men are more religious than others.

Here, again, is a dark and painful mystery. We see the operation of this
mystery even in the same family, where one of the children may be full of
sunlight, hope and music, and another may be doomed to walk in darkness
throughout a lifetime--unable to discern between Summer and Winter,
loaded with trouble and oppressed with undefinable apprehensions.

Jabez is known to history as pre-eminently a man of prayer. Although it
has been considered that the prayer of Jabez was uttered in view of some
imminent battle or other dreaded experience, yet by common consent Jabez
has been regarded by Christian students as a typical man of prayer.

Judging the case within the narrow limits of the history given in verses
nine and ten, it would seem as if Jabez started life in an act of prayer.
The image is at once graphic and beautiful. Think of a young man standing
at the door of his house, looking abroad at the unknown and unmeasured
world, listening to the conflicting voices which troubled his native air,
and then turning his eyes to Heaven and asking divine direction before he
would take a single step from the threshold of his home.

Nothing of the nature of mere romance attaches itself to this picture.

This, indeed, is what every young man ought to do before going out to
battle or labor. It would appear, from instances which have come under
our view, that God condescends to receive from men promises of religious
life on certain providential conditions. We can not understand this now,
but it is perfectly clear, from such instances as Jacob and Jabez, that
God was willing to respond to propositions of obedience founded upon the
realization of specified blessings.

The prayer of Jabez must be judged to be good, for the sufficient reason
that it was answered--“and God granted him that which he requested.”

Is the conduct of life, then, open to regulation upon such high and
sacred lines? May a young man come before the Almighty, speak out all his
heart and receive promises of continual guidance and defense from the
Living One?

If we could realize the certainty of this holy commerce as between Earth
and Heaven, our whole life would be lifted to a noble level, our spirit
would be released from the dominion of fear, and instead of laboring
in toilsome prayer, we should be filled with the spirit of triumphant
thankfulness and praise.

What privileges are open to the young! It lies within their power to
give a whole life-time to God. Those who have advanced considerably in
life can now but give a fraction of their days, but the young soul can
give God the brightness of the morning, the glory of noonday and the
tranquility of evening.

Let the young think of this, and give themselves diligently to the study
of such instances as that of Jabez, knowing that if they remember their
Creator in the days of their youth increasing age will mean increasing
joy.


JEHORAM.

Jehoram undertakes an expedition against King Mesha, but in doing so he
pays a tribute to the power of the king of Moab by allying with himself
Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, and also the king of Edom. A remarkable
character is given of Jehoram. He was not an imitator of the evil of his
father as to its precise form, but he had his own method of serving the
devil.

We should have thought that Ahab and Jezebel had exhausted all the arts
of wickedness, but it turns out that Jehoram had found a way of his own
of living an evil life.

Warned by the untimely fate of his brother, which had fallen upon him
expressly on account of his Baal worship, Jehoram began his reign by an
ostentatious abolition of the Phenician state religion, which his father
had introduced.

Jehoram went back to the olden times, and re-established the worship of
the calf, after the pattern which Jeroboam, its founder, had patronized.
His doing so, however, he found to be quite compatible with a secret
allowance that the people should practice their own form of worship.

There is room in wickedness for the exercise of genius of a certain
limited kind. The limitation is imposed by wickedness itself--for, after
all, wickedness is made up of but few elements.

Many persons suppose that if they do not sin according to the prevailing
fashion they are not sinning at all. They imagine that by varying the
form of the evil they have mitigated the evil itself.

A good deal of virtue is supposed to consist in reprobating certain forms
of vice. A man may be no drunkard, according to the usual acceptation of
the term, and yet he may be in a continual state of intoxication. It is
possible to shudder at what is usually known as persecution, and yet all
the while to be beheading enemies and burning martyrs.

Jehoram made a kind of trick of wickedness. He knew how to give a twist
to old forms, or a turn to old ways, so as to escape part of their
vulgarity and yet to retain all their iniquity.

A most alarming thought it is to the really spiritual mind that men may
become adepts in wickedness--experts in evil doing--and may be able so
to manage their corrupt designs as to deceive many observers by a mere
change of surface or appearance.

We do not amend the idolatry by altering the shape of the altar. We do
not destroy the mischievous power of unbelief by throwing our skepticism
into metaphysical phrases, and thus making verbal mysteries where we
might have spiritual illumination. We are deceived by things simply
because we ourselves live a superficial life and read only the history of
appearances.

What is the cure for all this manipulation of evil, this changing of
complexion and of form, and this consequent imagining that the age is
improving because certain phenomena which used to be so patent are no
longer discernible on the face of things?

We come back to the sublime doctrine of regeneration, as the answer to
the great inquiry: “What is the cure for this heart disease?”

“Marvel not that I said unto thee: ‘Ye must be born again.’”

We may change either the language or the manners of wickedness, or the
times and seasons for doing wicked things, and we may decorate our
wickedness with many beautiful colors, but so long as the heart itself
is unchanged decoration is useless--yea, worse than useless; for it is a
vain attempt to make that look true which is false--an endeavor even to
deceive Omniscience itself.

“And Mesha, king of Moab, was a sheepmaster, and rendered unto the king
of Israel an hundred thousand lambs and an hundred thousand rams, with
the wool. But it came to pass, when Ahab was dead, that the king of Moab
rebelled against the king of Israel.”

Enduring masteries are not of a physical kind. Ahab held Mesha simply by
a strong arm, and the consequence was that, as soon as Ahab was dead,
Mesha refused to render the tribute.

This historical circumstance, limited so far as the mere letter is
concerned, is full of significance to the Christian Church and to all
Christian countries.

Let us not call ourselves masters of positions or of men, simply because
we happen to have the stronger arm. The dominion which is acquired by
mere strength and held by superior force is an illusion wherever it is
found.

The men whom we may so hold may be hypocrites enough to assume an
acquiescent attitude, or even to display a complacent demeanor; they may
even go so far as to appear to be grateful for the rule which they can
not set aside. But all such appearances are of necessity without reason,
and therefore without continuance. They are always to be suspected.

This would be so in the case of the Christian faith, had we the power of
imposing even its nominal belief upon any nation. Suppose we say that
any man not professing the Christian faith shall certainly be fined,
imprisoned or otherwise punished. It is easy to see that such a threat
might in many instances bring about an appearance of acquiescence. But it
must be, by the very necessity of the case, appearance only.

Faith is a question of the individual judgment and of the individual
heart, and can not be controlled in any degree by external authority.

Suppose we create a law making it penal to open places of business on
the Sabbath day. Looking upon all commercial houses whose business was
suspended for a particular time, we might say: “See how unanimously and
happily the Sabbath day is observed in this country!”

But such would be an altogether superficial and mistaken judgment. The
Sabbath day can not be kept by law. If the Sabbath is not kept by the
reason, and is not hailed with thankful delight by the very heart, it can
never be kept at all.

All shops may be closed, all places of amusement may suspend their
entertainments, all toys may be put away from the nursery, all out-door
enjoyments and avocations may be withdrawn for the time, but the people
who have retired in apparent acceptance of these conditions, but not in
heartfelt acquiescence with them, are breaking the Sabbath every moment
they breathe.

Here is a great law for the house, the church and the nation. The head of
the family who rules by mere dread or tyranny is not training an obedient
household, but he is preparing an outburst of sedition, which sooner or
later must transpire, and when it occurs his ruin is certain.

The same law applies in the matter of capital and labor. The man who only
works that he may receive his wages never truly serves or makes his labor
into a delight. The man who can threaten the laborer by withdrawment of
pecuniary recognition never elicits from that laborer a response to duty,
though he may insist on a formal compliance with law.

What a blessed mastery is that of Jesus Christ in this respect.

For Christ reasons with men, and addresses the very highest form and
quality of mind; He sets before men the alternative courses of life,
and beseeches them to accept the straight and narrow way leading to
repentance. Certainly he threatens, He denounces, He declares an awful
issue for the wicked man, but it is not mere threatening or mere
denunciation; it is the solemn disclosure of a sequence which even
Almighty God could not suspend and yet retain the integrity of His throne
and the security of the universe. We must never accuse Jesus Christ of
what is termed “threatening.” His denunciations are revelations, and not
the expressions of merely angry feelings.

The way of the approach having been settled, the kings proceeded to fetch
a compass of seven days’ journey around by the south end of the Dead Sea.
They little knew the difficulty that would arise in their way. We do not
read that they made any religious inquiry at the outset of their journey,
and therefore no responsibility could be charged upon God for the
misadventure which occurred. The three kings seem to have consulted only
with themselves, and to have resolved in their own counsel and strength
upon their expedition against Mesha.

What was the misadventure which occurred? It is related: “And there was
no water for the host and for the cattle that followed them.”

Even kings are dependent upon nature. Think of three kings, who supposed
themselves at least to be very mighty, and all their people, stopped in
their career simply for want of water!

A very pitiable and yet very instructive picture is this of three kings
and their armies standing still merely for want of water. The so-called
little things of life are often turned into not only things that are
great, but into things that are vital.

Blessed indeed would be the man who sees even in natural arrangements and
daily providences a call to him to lift up his head toward the heavens
and ask great questions about being and duty and destiny.

So we have the usual religious appeal: “Is there not here a prophet of
the Lord, that we may inquire of the Lord by him?”

Elisha now assumes a new attitude, and one certainly not destitute of
spiritual grandeur. Turning to the king of Israel, he said:

“‘What have I to do with thee? Get thee to the prophets of thy father,
and to the prophets of thy mother.’ And the king of Israel said unto him:
‘Nay; for the Lord hath called these three kings together, to deliver
them into the hand of Moab.’”

Observe that this address was made to the very king of Israel. It simply
means that the God of Israel had nothing to do with the king of Israel,
and yet Israel was understood to be a theocracy. The form was theocratic,
but not the power.

Think of a man bearing the name of God, and yet being godless! A temple
deserted of its deity is surely a melancholy sight, but what shall be
said of the man from whose heart the Spirit of the living God has utterly
departed?

Elisha seems to have inherited the taunting spirit of his great
predecessor: “Get thee to the prophets of thy father, and to the prophets
of thy mother.”

Who can say with how bitter a taunt the word “mother” was pronounced in
this connection?

The evil that men do goes on for many a day--not only to the end of their
life-time, but it lives after them.

This is a taunt that is founded on reason. If men have been serving a god
for seven years past, surely it can not be unreasonable to refer them to
that god in the time of their extremity. What is faith if it can not be
tested? What is the value of an altar if you can not go to it and find
lying upon it direct answers to your prayer?

Is there any thing meaner in all the history of cowardice than that a man
should ignore the living God all his life, and then whiningly repent upon
his death-bed? Why does he not go to the trusts to which he has committed
himself, and say he will die in them as he has lived in them? Surely, the
cowardice of men should teach those who observe it something regarding
the nature and uses of religious faith.

The appeal of Elisha was perfectly fair.

If the gods of Jehoram were worth any thing, they could find water for
him in the time of his necessity. Let them do it. If they will do it,
then they will establish their claim to be regarded with reverence, and
indeed be honored and worshiped.

We must insist upon making the same appeal in our own day. Men must be
made to feel their irreligion.

Jehoram did feel his in this instance, for he protested against the
decision of Elisha. Throughout the course of Scripture men are referred
to their gods, and are made to test the value of their religion.

Possibly many a Jehoram may be acting under influences which he himself
can not explain--so much that he becomes a puzzle to his own mind,
wondering how it is that he takes one road when he has decided upon
another, and that he mistakes substances for shadows and shadows for
substances, so that his whole life is turned into a mocking bewilderment.

The answer is given in Scripture: “I also will choose their delusions,
and will bring their fears upon them; because when I called, none did
answer; when I spake, they did not hear; but they did evil before Mine
eyes, and chose that in which I delighted not.”

Now we come to a better phase of this history--namely, to the saving
element--which appears and reappears in the course of our changeful life.

Elisha was not to be placated by the king of Israel. In his eyes a vile
person was contemned. The king of Israel was but a poor, frail thing
in the presence of a man who lived with God and was commissioned to
denounce the judgments of Heaven against evil. But the world is not made
up of Jehorams. Blessed be God, there are men of another type, whose very
presence saves society from judicial ruin.

“And Elisha said: ‘As the Lord of Hosts liveth, before whom I stand,
surely, were it not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat, the king
of Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee.’”

Now we know that the spirit of Elijah rested upon Elisha. We seem to hear
the very tones of the old master in the new disciple. Is it not always so
in life--that it is one man who saves many; that the ten righteous men
save the city, and that Paul saves all those who sail with him in the
midst of the tempestuous sea?

Your house is saved because of your little child. Your whole estate is
protected from ruin because your wife is a praying woman. Your life would
be cut off tomorrow in shame and disgrace were it not that you have
entered upon an inheritance of prayers laid up for you by those who went
before.

Life thus becomes very sacred and very tender, and we know not to whom we
are under the deepest obligations. Enough to know that, somewhere, there
is a presence that saves us, there is an influence that guards our life,
and that we owe absolutely nothing in the way of security or honor to bad
kings or bad men of any name.

The remainder of the chapter is occupied with a prophecy of Elisha and by
a statement of the overthrow of the king of Moab.

Nothing now could save Mesha. A strong delusion was sent upon him to
believe a lie. When water came down by way of Edom, and the whole country
was filled with it, the Moabites rose up early in the morning, and as the
Sun shone on the water the Moabites saw the water on the other side as
red as blood.

It looked so like blood that they declared it to be blood; and, believing
that the kings were slain who had come up against them, the Moabites
advanced to the spoil. Alas, they advanced to their ruin.

The king of Moab saw that the battle was too sore for him. In his despair
he took with him seven hundred men that drew swords, to break through
even unto the king of Edom, but through the iron wall he could not force
his way. In his madness he took his eldest son, who should have reigned
in his stead, and flung him for a burnt offering upon the wall.

But the Lord will not be pleased with thousands of rams or with ten
thousand rivers of oil, nor will He accept the first-born for a man’s
transgression or the fruit of his body for the sin of his soul.


JEHORAM, KING OF JUDAH.

Verses sixteen to twenty-nine, inclusive, of the eighth chapter of the
second Book of Kings should be compared with the twenty-first chapter of
the second Book of Chronicles. The name Joram is an obvious contraction
of Jehoram. Joram and Jehoram were practically interchangeable terms.
The king of Israel is called Joram, and the king of Judah Jehoram. In
another place Joram is the name of the king of Judah. In two other places
both kings are called Jehoram.

Jehoram “walked in the way of the kings of Israel, as did the house of
Ahab”--in other words, as the house of Ahab acted. Jehoram, as son-in-law
of Ahab and Jezebel, gave his patronage to the worship of the Tyrian Baal.

Jehoram had examples enough before him of the fate which had befallen
idolatrous worship, and yet, turning his eye backward upon all the ruins
which had been created by divine anger, he pursued his evil way as if
the Lord had approved the house of Ahab and its idolatry rather than
manifested His judgments upon them.

Rational men may well ask themselves how it is that history is lost on
some minds. They look backward and see that from the beginning sin has
always been followed by punishment, and punishment has in many cases been
carried as far as death itself. Yet in view of all the suffering, and in
full sight of the innumerable graves dug by the hand of justice, they
continue the same policy without one particle of alteration.

One would have supposed that, looking at the history of the kings of
Israel, Jehoram would have said:

“I see now exactly what to avoid; and to see what to avoid is to begin
to see what to cultivate and establish. It is perfectly evident that the
worship of Baal is doomed, or that wherever it is set up divine anger
instantly and severely attests the displeasure of God. It must be my
care, therefore, to destroy every trace of idolatry, and build up faith
in the true God.”

This would have been called reflective and philosophical on the part
of the king, and indeed any thing that stood opposed to this course of
reasoning would seem to be marked by incredible fatuity.

The contrary, however, is the exact fact. With all the evidences of
divine displeasure around him Jehoram continued in the worship of Baal,
or in some other form of idolatry which might appeal to the popular
imagination or gratify the desires of his own corrupt fancy.

It is easy for moralists to condemn this neglect of history, and to point
out to those who, having neglected it, come into suffering and loss, that
they ought to have been wise before the event; but the very same thing is
done even by the moralists who criticize the course of Jehoram and his
predecessors.

This is the sin of every age, and it should be looked at clearly and
acknowledged frankly, because until we do bring ourselves into vital
relation to it our reasoning will be founded on false bases and will
hasten itself to false conclusions.

All history is teaching us that the wages of sin is death; that the way
of transgressors is hard; that, though hand join in hand, the wicked
shall not go unpunished; that the face of the Lord is as a flint against
evil doers. Yet, with this plainest of all lessons written on the very
face of history, men are doing today as their predecessors did centuries
ago, and will probably continue to repeat the folly and the wickedness
until the end of time.

Surely, this is as curious a puzzle as any that occurs in all the annals
of human history. It would seem, indeed, to be more than a puzzle; to
be, in fact, indicative of a suicidal disposition on the part of the
actor. It would not be tolerated in any other department of life.

If a man had known that a hundred of his ancestors were killed by
drinking a certain liquid, and he thus knowingly put that liquid to his
lips, the iniquity of his suicide would be aggravated by the knowledge of
what had occurred in the records of his family.

How many murders, then, may he be said to accomplish who murders himself
as to his moral nature and spiritual cultivation? He does not do it in
ignorance. All history is surrounding him with its evidence, and is doing
its utmost to secure his attention, and he himself is not unwilling to
acknowledge that the testimony of history is uniform and absolute. Yet
some immeasurable force within him drives him with infinite fury to the
repetition of every sin and the defiance of every judgment.

What was the reason of all this patronage and support of idolatry?

Jehoram had an excellent father, and if any thing was to be expected from
the operation of the law of hereditary dispositions, it would be that
Jehoram would be of the same quality as Jehoshaphat.

Some curious and energetic influence must have been at work to throw
back all hereditary quality and convert the man into a totally different
nature. What was that influence? An expression in the eighteenth verse
explains its nature and its scope: “For the daughter of Ahab was his
wife.”

Wherever we find the name of Ahab we also find the presence of evil.
Ahab lived again in his daughter, though Jehoshaphat did not repeat
himself in his son. “The evil that men do lives after them.” Jehoram was
under home influence; and is not home influence most potent of all? It is
a daily influence; it begins with the early morning and continues all the
day through. It does not assume aggressive attitudes or excite suspicion
by tumult and defiance of temper. It is noisy or quiet, persistent or
reluctant, energetic or languid, according to the peculiar circumstances
of the family history. At this moment a word too energetically spoken
might defeat its own object; at another moment a languid reference might
be more than a vehement appeal; and on still other occasions anger,
fury and clamor may bring to a point a long process of suggestion and
education.

This is the mystery of home life.

The plotter waits for opportunities, creates them, puts them in the way
of his victim, measures distances, regulates the methods of approaches.
He studies his prey, watches him with an evil eye, remembers all his
words, weighs them, calculates all their unspoken meanings, and at the
right moment interposes his own influence. Wicked men in this respect are
often models to good men.

The enemy of souls never rests.

“Your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom
he may devour.”

Nor is he always a lion. Sometimes he is as a serpent, and sometimes
even as an angel of light. But his evil policy never hesitates. When
he blesses, it is that he may curse; when he leads his victim into the
light, it is that he may have the greater influence over him to persuade
him into the darkness.

Is it of no consequence with whom we live our daily life? Is the married
relation one that expresses mere taste or momentary pleasure? Are not the
companionships of life its true sources of tuition and inspiration?

A man who is in happy fellowship at home may over-get some of the worst
hereditary infirmities and disabilities, and may be encouraged into
attainments of correct self-discipline and virtue which under other
circumstances would be simply impossible.

The conversion of the world, it would seem, must begin at home. We
must have happier married relations, fuller domestic confidence, riper
household trust and sympathy.

Out of all this daily education, under happy influences, there may come a
kind of character rich in its own quality and beneficent in its influence
on society.

Jehoram had provoked the Lord, yet so pitiful is the God of Heaven that
He spared Judah for the sake of David, His servant, as He promised to
give David always a light. But Jehoram was, nevertheless, severely
punished for his wickedness.

In his days Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah, and made a king
over themselves. Libnah also revolted at the same time. Thus the peace of
the kingdom was broken up, and Jehoram was made indirectly to suffer for
the sin of idolatry.

How quietly the twenty-third verse reads! It says: “And the rest of the
acts of Joram, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of
the chronicles of the kings of Judah?” It would seem as if the bad king
had simply fallen asleep like a tired child.

But in the second Book of Chronicles we read that Jehoram died of sore
diseases, and that “the people made no burning for him”--that is, the
usual honors of a sovereign were withheld in this particular case.

Jehoram died in contempt and neglect. He departed without being desired;
in other words, he departed without regret--died unregretted. He was not
refused burial in the city of David, but his body was not laid in the
sepulchers of the kings.

Thus, sooner or later, wickedness finds out a man, and brands him with
dishonor. If, under other conditions, wickedness is carried to the grave
amid great pomp and circumstance, it is only that the dishonor may be
found in some other quarter--in the hatred of good men and in the bitter
recriminations of those who have been wronged.

Set it down as a sure doctrine that, whenever a bad man is buried,
dishonor attaches to his whole name, and contempt withers every flower
that may be planted over his grave.

The words “but not in the sepulchers of the kings” may receive a larger
interpretation than the technical one which belongs to this immediate
circumstance. Men are buried in the sepulchers of the kings when their
lives are full of beneficence, when their names are the symbols of
noble charity, large-minded justice, heroic fortitude, tender sympathy
for others. Their burying place is not a merely topographical point.
Their relation to the hearts that knew them, their place in the memory
of those who lived with them, the tears which are shed over the
recollection of their good deeds, the void which has been created by
their removal--all these constitute the royalty of their interment.

The end of Jehoram, king of Judah--who would choose it?


JEHOSHAPHAT.

In succeeding to the throne of Judah Jehoshaphat simply followed the
course of a law, but in strengthening himself against Israel he indicated
a personal policy.

How definitely the statement reads!

“And Jehoshaphat, his son, reigned in his stead, and strengthened himself
against Israel.”

There is no doubt or hesitation in the mind of Jehoshaphat as to the
course which ought to be pursued. He did not simply think that he would
strengthen himself against Israel; he had not a merely momentary vision
of a possible fortification against the enemy; but he carried out his
purpose, and thus challenged northern Israel. On the other hand, how
peaceful is the declaration that is here made! There is not an aggressive
tone in all the statement.

Innocent Jehoshaphat simply “strengthened himself against Israel”--that
is to say, he put himself into a highly defensive position, so that if
the enemy should pour down from the north Jehoshaphat would be secured
against his assaults.

Every thing, therefore, depends on the point of view which we take of
this policy. But the thing which history has made clear is that a man
often lays down a policy before awaiting the issue of events which would
determine its scope and tone.

All this was done by Jehoshaphat before he connected himself by marriage
with the northern dynasty.

A marriage may upset a policy; a domestic event may alter the course of
a king’s thinking, and may readjust the lines of a nation’s relation to
other kingdoms.

The wise man holds himself open to the suggestion and inspiration of
events. No man is as wise today as he will be tomorrow--provided, he pay
attention to the literature of providence which is being daily written
before his eyes. Our dogmatics, whether in theology or in state policy,
should be modified by the recollection that we do not now know all
things, and that further light may show what we do know in a totally
different aspect. Our policy, like our bread, should in a sense be from
day to day.

When men are omniscient they may lay down a theological program from
which departure would be blasphemy; but until they are omniscient they
had better write with modesty and subscribe even their best constructed
creeds with reservations which will leave room for providence.

“And the Lord was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first ways
of his father, David, and sought not unto Baalim.”

The Lord was not with Jehoshaphat because he strengthened himself against
Israel, nor because he had placed forces in all the fenced cities of
Judah, and set garrisons in the land of Judah and within the streets of
Ephraim. Not one of these little triumphs is referred to as affording God
a basis for the complaisant treatment of the new king.

As ever, the Lord’s relation to Jehoshaphat was determined by
Jehoshaphat’s own moral condition. A very beautiful expression is this:
“He walked in the first ways of his father, David.” That is to say, in
the former or earlier ways of David, as contrasted with David’s later
conduct.

Some have found here a tacit allusion to David’s greatest sin, which he
committed when he was advanced in life. A somewhat mournful thing it
is that a man’s first ways should be better than his last. The other
relation would seem to be the one which reason would approve and God
would specially honor--namely, that a man’s old age should be the ripest
and best part of his conduct--rich with wisdom, strong with experience,
and chastened by many a pensive recollection.

Sad when you have to go back to a man’s youth to find his virtues or his
most conspicuous excellences; but most beautiful when a man’s earlier
mistakes are lost in the richness and wisdom of his later conduct.

Jehoshaphat’s conduct in this matter is the more notable because of the
constant observation of mankind that it is easier to follow the evil than
to imitate the good. When imitation enters into a man’s life he is apt to
copy that which is inferior, and to leave without reproduction that which
is lofty and disciplinary.

In this instance Jehoshaphat sets an example to the world. His conduct,
too, is represented negatively as well as positively--“and sought not
unto Baalim.” The word “Baalim” is in the plural number, and the literal
reading might be: “Jehoshaphat sought not the Baals.” The Baals were
different local aspects or phases of the Sun god.

It is to be specially noted that the term Baal includes an aspect even of
Jehovah--that is to say, Israel had degenerated so far as to suppose that
in worshiping Baal they were worshiping at least one phase of the true
God.

It is often difficult to abandon a popular custom. More people might be
in favor of Jehoshaphat strengthening himself against Israel than in
returning to the first ways of David and abandoning the altar of the
Baals.

History and religion are always considered in their separate distribution.

There are politicians who would vote for a war who would on no account
surrender a superstition. On the other hand, there are men who pride
themselves on being free of the influence of superstition, yet who would
enter willingly into the most sanguinary wars for the extension of empire
or the glory of some particular throne.

In Jehoshaphat we seem to come into contact with a complete character--in
other words, a man who in every point was equally strong, a man of
foresight, a man of reverence, a man of an honest heart, a man who felt
that idolatry and true worship could not co-exist in the same breast.

“But sought to the Lord God of his father, and walked in His
commandments, and not after the doings of Israel.”

We must be prepared for singularity if we are genuinely prepared to be
good. Let a man settle it with himself in prayerful solitude whether he
means to walk with God or to identify himself with the spirit and customs
of his age.

Jehoshaphat laid down a clear program for himself, and he followed it
out with patient and faithful industry. “The Lord God of his father” was
not a mere term in a crowd; it was the object of daily search and quest.
Jehoshaphat inquired for Him, and operated constantly upon the doctrine:
“Ask, and it shall be given you; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.”

Nor was Jehoshaphat’s religion merely speculative--that is to say, an
intellectual quest after an intellectual God. Whatever was speculative
in the mind and service of Jehoshaphat was sustained and ennobled by a
solid moral element. He read the Decalogue; he studied the Word of God;
he would take no action--personal, regal or social--that was not first
examined and approved in the light of the divine statutes.

All this might have been comparatively easy if Jehoshaphat had started at
an independent point; but at such a point no man can start, for he must
take up the age as he finds it, and must first disembarrass himself from
all the stipulations and claims of custom, usage and popular superstition.

Jehoshaphat sought not after the doings of Israel. He set himself up in
this respect against the kingdom. He was not afraid of peculiarity; in a
word, Jehoshaphat’s religion was characteristic; it had lines, points and
colors of its own, about which there could be no reasonable mistake.

What is our religion?

Do we intellectually assent to the existence and sovereignty of one
God, and then degenerate into self-worship? Do we admit that there must
be an ultimate morality, a philosophy of conduct founded on eternal
metaphysics; and then do we measure our own behavior by the canon of
custom?

These are questions that search the heart, and no man can answer them for
his brother.

What became of all this noble conduct arising out of this high religious
conception? We shall see in the following verse:

“Therefore the Lord established the kingdom in his hand; and all
Judah brought to Jehoshaphat presents, and he had riches and honor in
abundance.”

Whatever was doubtful about the ascent of Jehoshaphat to the throne was
removed, and the king was enabled to realize his power. When he closed
his hand on the royal scepter he found that he was not grasping a shadow
but a reality.

There are times when men become fully conscious of their influence and
of their proper social position; happy are they if in this consciousness
they detect a prevailing religious element, which constrains them to
acknowledge that honor and wealth, power and dignity are the gifts of
God. Is not this an anticipation of the Savior’s great doctrine: “Seek
ye first the kingdom of God, and His righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you”?

Jehoshaphat did not seek riches and honor. But he sought to the Lord God
of his father and walked in the divine commandments, and as a result
he enjoyed all that kings delight in as indicating strength, renown and
influence.

“And his heart was lifted up in the ways of the Lord; moreover, he took
away the high places and the groves out of Judah.”

The expression “his heart was lifted up” is an awkward one. The lifting
up of the heart signifies increase of pride, a sensation of vanity, a
desire to gratify personal ambition, and to make an idol of his will. In
this instance the marginal reading is to be preferred--“was encouraged;”
or otherwise, “his courage rose high.” It has also been rendered:
“Jehoshaphat grew bold”--that is to say, he was not a timid reformer or
a timid worshiper, nor a trimmer or time server in any sense. He was a
heroic worshiper of the living God. When he saw that reform was necessary
he went forward with a steady step and an energetic hand.

We should call Jehoshaphat a man of conviction and a man who had the
courage of his convictions. Altogether, this is the outline of a noble
personage--a born king, a man who has a right to the purple and the
scepter. When such men ascend thrones nations should be glad and rejoice
with a great joy, for their character is grander than their office and
their spirit is the best guarantee of the elevation and utility of their
regal policy.

Becoming conscious of his power, knowing that his kingdom was established
from on high, Jehoshaphat not only did not seek the Baals himself, but he
took away the high places and groves out of Judah.

Jehoshaphat was not content with a merely personal religion. He could
not convert the hearts of his people, but he could destroy all the
symbols of unholy worship.

Men are only required to do that which lies in their power. A proprietor
may not be able to make people sober, but he can forbid the introduction
of temptations to drunkenness. A parent may not be able to subdue
the spirit of pride, but he can in many instances limit the means of
gratifying it.

There are reforms which are open to us all--in personal custom, in social
habit, and it may be even in imperial ways. Let each Jehoshaphat seize
his opportunity and magnify it.

All this would have been comparatively in vain but for another step
which Jehoshaphat took. In the third year of his reign he sent to his
princes--that is to say, he sent his princes--and he sent Levites, all
of whose names are given; and he sent also two priests, Elishama and
Jehoram, and their business was purely educational.

“And they taught in Judah, and had the book of the law of the Lord with
them, and went about throughout all the cities of Judah, and taught the
people.”

This was a mixed commission--partly civil, partly ecclesiastical. The men
here mentioned are otherwise unknown. We identify them as educational
reformers, or reformers who operated through the medium of education.
They were not warriors, destroyers, revolutionists, but men who addressed
the mind and understanding and conscience, and caused men to know that
the true law was from above and not from beneath.

The book which the commission had in hand was the Pentateuch, or the law
of Moses. This was known to be the law which alone could touch all the
vital necessities of the commonwealth. Again and again we are constrained
to admit that there is a law beyond man, above man, in a sense apart from
man. Men are not driven within themselves to find a law, an instinct,
or a reason. They have a written statute, an authoritative declaration,
a book which Christian teachers do not hesitate to describe as a
revelation, and to that they call the attention of men.

If the teacher were teaching out of his own consciousness he would be
but an equal, often exposing himself to the destructive criticism of his
more advanced and penetrating scholars; but the teacher takes his stand
on a book--on _the_ Book, the Bible--a revelation which he believes to be
divine and final.

Say what we will, the effect of Bible teaching must be judged by its
fruits.

Where are the nations that are most distinguished for wide and varied
intelligence, for large and exhaustive sympathy, for missionary
enterprise, for philanthropic institutions and for all the elements which
give grace and beauty to social existence?

The question should admit of definite reply.

The facts are before men; let them judge fearlessly and honestly, and we
need have no apprehension concerning their verdict.

Wherever the word of the Lord has had free course superstition has
been chased away, human slavery has been abolished, every instance
of intolerance, injustice, unkindness has felt the influence of holy
thought. In all these matters discussion should be limited strictly to
facts. Thus kings can help nations, not by forcing education, not by
attempting to rule opinion, not by setting up standards of orthodoxy to
fall short of which is to incur penalty; but by spreading education, by
extending light, by cultivating a spirit of inquiry, and by a generous
multiplication of all the instrumentalities needed for the destruction of
ignorance. What may come of this we are not supposed at this moment to
know.

Meanwhile, let us be thankful that we are face to face with a man who has
conviction, courage, independence, high patriotism and generous impulse,
and let us hope that his end may be as beautiful as his beginning was
promising.


JEHU.

While Jehoram was lying ill of his wounds Elisha had called one of
the children of the prophets and sent him on a special mission to
Ramoth-gilead.

It has been conjectured that this messenger was the Jonah who is
mentioned in the twenty-fifth verse of the fourteenth chapter of the
second Book of Kings.

Jehu was left in supreme command of the forces at Jehoram’s departure.
Nothing is known of Jehu’s origin. From the first, however, it is evident
that he was called to special functions. He was one of the men who had
been foreseen by Elijah, the prophet, under the divine inspiration.

Elijah was ordered to return unto the wilderness of Damascus, and in the
course of his progress he was to anoint Jehu, the son of Nimshi, to be
king over Israel. Whether any communication had been made to Jehu we know
not. Yet it is not improbable that this had been done, as we may infer
from the way in which he made answer to the appeal when it was addressed
to him by the messenger of Elisha.

All the circumstances of the communication are full of dramatic color and
impressiveness.

The young man was to take a vial of oil and pour it on Jehu’s head, and
say: “Thus saith the Lord: ‘I have anointed thee king over Israel.’”
Instantly he was to open the door and flee from the presence of the new
monarch. A tremendous charge was delivered to Jehu by the young man:

“And thou shalt smite the house of Ahab, thy master, that I may avenge
the blood of My servants, the prophets, and the blood of all the servants
of the Lord, at the hand of Jezebel. For the whole house of Ahab shall
perish; … and I will make the house of Ahab like the house of Jeroboam,
the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha, the son of Ahijah; and
the dogs shall eat Jezebel in the portion of Jezreel, and there shall be
none to bury her.”

Having delivered this message, the young man then “opened the door and
fled,” as if pursued by fire. We know not whether to pity Jehu under
the delivery of this charge. The Lord must have many servants in His
household, and some of them are entrusted with hard work. If we could
choose our places in the divine economy, who would not elect to be a
minister of sympathy, consolation and tenderness to broken hearts? Who
would be willing to go forth to fight the battle and endure the trial and
hardship of military service? Above all, who would be willing to accept
the ministry of shedding blood and cleansing the world of evil by putting
to death all evil doers?

We must recognize the diversity of function in the Christian Church, and
in every department of human life. Few men could do what Jehu did, but
where the special qualification is given the special service is also
demanded.

It is pitiful criticism that stands back and shudders at the career of
Jehu; it is wanting in large-mindedness and in completeness of view.

The Lord’s work is many-sided, and all kinds of men as to intellectual
energy and moral daring, and even as to physical capability, are required
to complete the ministry of God.

Today one man is gifted with the power of intercession, another with the
talent of controversy, another with the genius of exposition, another
with the supreme gift of consolation; one minister must tarry at home
and work close to the fireside at which he was brought up; in another is
the spirit of travel and adventure, and he must brave all the dangers of
enterprise and hasten to the ends of the Earth, that he may tell others
what he knows of the Gospel of Christ.

We must recognize this diversity, and the unity that it constitutes;
otherwise we shall take but a partial view of the many-sided ministry
which Jesus Christ came to establish, and to which He has promised His
continual inspiration.

[Illustration: SOLOMON]

[Illustration: THE JUDGMENT OF SOLOMON. I Kings, iii.]

When Jehu came forth he was taunted by the servants of his Lord; they
called the young man “mad.” From their manner, Jehu began to wonder
whether the whole affair had not been planned by themselves with a view
to befooling him by the excitement of his ambition. He said to them, in
effect:

“Ye know the man, and his communication in this matter is one of your own
arranging. Ye think to make a fool of me, and through the intoxication of
my vanity to lead me to my ruin.”

But they denied the impeachment, and their tone so changed that Jehu
reposed confidence in them, and told them what the man had said.

Instantly, on hearing the message, they hasted, took every man his
garment or coat, and put it under Jehu on the top of the stairs, which
they constituted a kind of temporary throne, and then amid loud blasts of
the trumpet they cried: “Jehu is king!”

Thus Jehu was suddenly called to royalty and all its responsibilities.

Men should be prepared for the sudden calls of providence. “What I say
unto you I say unto all: Watch.”

One is struck by the obedience of Jehu to the heavenly call. There was
no hesitation. Men but show themselves to be yet under bondage when they
hesitate regarding the calls which God addresses to them.

Jehu was determined to make complete work of his mission. Not one was to
escape or go forth out of the city to tell what he was about to do to
those who were in Jezreel.

Springing into his chariot and calling for a detachment of cavalry,
Jehu set out on his journey of sixty or seventy miles. You can see him
almost flying down from Ramoth, which was about three thousand feet above
the sea level. Swiftly he crosses the Jordan, and then, turning to the
north, he fled over the spurs of Ephraim; then he darted up the Valley of
Trembling, made famous in the day of Gideon, and finally he came to the
Plain of Esdraelon, where was Jezreel.

Jehoram was unaware of the approach of Jehu. One messenger after another
was sent out to make inquiry, but the messengers were ordered behind, and
Jehu came forward until he and the king met at the vineyard of Naboth.

The king asked what news was being brought--news of peace or of war.

The question was answered with another question: “What peace can there
be so long as the idolatrous whoredoms of thy mother, Jezebel, and her
witchcrafts are so many?”

Jehu thus referred to fundamental wrongs. Instead of trifling with
details he went straight to the fountainhead, and by the delivery of a
profoundly religious message he excited the alarm of those who heard him.

Jehoram was weak and feeble and sought to flee, but Jehu drew a bow with
his full strength and smote between his arms, and the arrow went out at
the king’s heart, and he sank down in his chariot.

Then Jehu ordered his captain, or squire, to take up Jehoram and cast him
into the portion of the field of Naboth, the Jezreelite, that the word of
the Lord might be fulfilled.

And when Ahaziah, the king of Judah, saw this he sought to flee, but
Jehu followed him, saying: “Smite him also in the chariot.” After a hot
pursuit Ahaziah was struck at the declivity of Gur, where his chariot was
forced to slacken its speed.

Then came the most tragical of all the acts.

No sooner was Jehu come to Jezreel than Jezebel, now old and withered,
heard of it, and her blood tingled at the news. She was not one who was
easily deterred.

According to the custom of Oriental ladies, Jezebel painted her eyebrows
and lashes with a pigment composed of antimony and zinc. The intention of
the dark border was to throw the eye into relief and make it look larger.
She adorned her head with a tire, or a headdress, and after donning her
royal dress she looked out at a window, designing to impress Jehu.

As Jehu looked up to the window he exclaimed: “Who is on my side?” He
ordered the two or three eunuchs who looked out to throw down the painted
woman. Jehu knew that the cruel queen was intensely hated by the palace
officials.

The two or three eunuchs who had been accustomed to crouch before her in
servile dread now saw that Jehu was in the ascendant, and in obedience to
the demand of the regicide they threw her out of the window.

Such has ever been the policy of sycophants--the rats of court--who only
linger there with a view of seeing how much they can appropriate or
destroy.

No sooner was Jezebel thrown down than some of her blood was sprinkled on
the wall and on the horses, and she was trodden under foot.

Here, again, we see the end of wickedness. For a time there is escape,
but in the long run there is ruin.

Look at Jezebel, and learn the fate of the wicked. No such fate, in
a merely physical sense, may await the iniquitous now; but all those
intermediate punishments simply point to the last great penalty: “The
wicked shall go away into everlasting punishment.”

One can pity Jezebel as her flesh was eaten by the dogs and her carcass
was made as dung on the face of the field in the portion of Jezreel, and
we almost shudder with horror as we think that she was to be so torn to
pieces that none should be able to say: “This is Queen Jezebel.”

But all this is wasted sentiment, unless we reason from it toward
spiritual conclusions.

We are so much the victims of our senses that we can pity with great
compassion those who are smitten with bodily disease, or are torn limb
from limb in consequence of some wicked deed; but it seems impossible for
us to rise to the conception of the terrible penalty which is to fall
upon the soul for violating God’s commandments and defying God’s power.

Instead of being appeased by the fate of Jezebel, Jehu sends out a decree
that the whole family of Ahab shall be massacred--that the kinsmen of
Ahaziah and the Baal worshipers shall be extirpated from the face of the
Earth. He takes a new point of departure when he challenges the sons of
Ahab, saying:

“Look even out the best and meetest of your master’s sons, and set him on
his father’s throne, and fight for your master’s house.”

All this was a declaration of warlike intention on the part of Jehu. But
Jehu’s character as a soldier was too well known to permit the rulers of
Jezreel and the elders to entertain the thought of encountering him in
open battle. So they made this answer:

“We are thy servants, and will do all that thou shalt bid us; we will not
make any king. Do thou that which is good in thine eyes.”

Then Jehu set up a test of their obedience. He did impose on them hard
work. He said:

“If ye be mine, and if ye will hearken unto my voice, take ye the heads
of the men your master’s sons, and come to me to Jezreel by tomorrow this
time.”

The word was enough. The heads of seventy men were put into baskets and
sent to Jehu at Jezreel. Jehu pronounced the men who had beheaded the
sons of Ahab guiltless in respect of their deaths, because what they did
had been done judicially, under royal command.

Some think that Jehu wished to make them guilty of the massacre of the
princes, while he had slain but one king. On the whole, however, it is
better to consider that Jehu exculpates the men who had only executed his
command.

The slaughter of the priests is one of the most dramatic incidents in all
this portion of biblical history. Jehu proceeded by way of strategy. It
is impossible to justify the spirit of the policy of Jehu in this matter.
He said he would serve Baal “much.”

It has been thought that he was thinking of his intended holocaust of
human victims; but, whatever his thoughts, it is impossible to deny that
the impression he produced was that Jehu was about to become a worshiper
of Baal. This reading is imported into the narrative in these words:
“But Jehu did it in subtilty, to the intent that he might destroy the
worshipers of Baal.”

Now a solemn assembly for Baal was proclaimed. From all Israel the
devotees of Baal came, so that there was not left a man that came not.
The house of Baal was full from one end to the other. And they were all
clothed with appropriate vestments.

Jehu was careful that not one worshiper of Jehovah should be in the
assembly, but those of Baal only.

When the worshipers went in to offer sacrifices and burnt offerings Jehu
stationed fourscore men without, and said: “If any of the men whom I have
brought into your hands escape, he that letteth him go, his life shall be
for the life of him.”

Then came the moment of massacre.

“And they smote them with the edge of the sword; and the guard and the
captains cast them out, and went to the city of the house of Baal.”

Jehu’s guards, having completed their bloody work in the court of the
temple, hastened up the steps into the sanctuary itself, which, like the
Temple of Solomon, was made after the pattern of a fortress.

The images of Baal were brought forth out of the house of Baal and
burned. The image of Baal was broken down, and his house was broken down,
and the whole scene was utterly dishonored and desecrated.

“Thus Jehu destroyed Baal out of Israel.”

But the way was wrong. Perhaps, for the period within which the
destruction took place, it was the only ministry that was possible. The
incident, however, must stand in historical isolation, being utterly
useless as a lesson or guide for our imitation.

We are called upon to destroy Baal out of Israel, but not with sword or
staff or implement of war.

“The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but are mighty, through God,
to the pulling down of strongholds of Satan.”

Jehu did his rough-and-ready work--a work, as we have said, adapted
to the barbaric conditions under which he reigned. But there must be
no Jehu in the Christian Church, except in point of energy, decision,
obedience and single-mindedness of purpose. A Christian persecution is a
contradiction in terms.

When Christians see evil, they are not to assail it with weapons of war;
they are to preach against it, to argue against it, to pray about it,
to bring all possible moral force to bear upon it, but in no case is
physical persecution to accompany the propagation of Christianity. Not
only so. Any destruction that is accomplished by physical means is a
merely temporary destruction. There is in reality nothing in it.

When progress of a Christian kind is reported it must not be tainted by
the presence of physical severity. We can not silence evil speakers by
merely closing their mouths. So long as we can hold those mouths there
may indeed be silence, but not until the spirit has been changed--not
until the very heart has been converted and born again--can the evil-doer
be silenced and his mouth be dispossessed of wicked speech and filled
with words of honesty and pureness. Jehu himself was not a good man.
“From the sins of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin,
Jehu departed not from after them.”

For reasons of state policy, Jehu maintained the worship of Bethel and
Dan.

“But Jehu took no heed to walk in the law of the Lord God of Israel with
all his heart; for he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, which made
Israel to sin.”

Jehu had done homage to Jehovah by extirpating the foreign Baal worship,
but he patronized and actively supported the irregular mode of worshiping
Jehovah established by Jeroboam as the state religion of the northern
kingdom. He attempted to serve God and Mammon. Religion was to him but a
political instrument.

Jehu did the particular kind of work which had been assigned to him--a
work of destruction and blood. Perhaps he alone of all the people of his
time could have accomplished this task. But Jehu must stand in history as
a warning rather than as an example.


JOB.

Sometimes I have most clearly seen the whole tragedy of Job in a waking
dream, the whole passing before me in twilight shadows, losing itself
in thick darkness, reappearing in light like the dawn--always changing,
always solemn, always instructive; a thing that surely happened, because
a thing now happening in all the substance of its eternal meaning.

Is it a pillar grand in height, and finished all over with the dainty
care of an artist whose life has been spent in learning and applying the
art of color?

How stately! How Heaven seeking because Heaven worthy! While I admire, I
wonder religiously.

I see the hosts of darkness gathering around the erstwhile flashing
capital, and resting over it like midnight sevenfold in blackness; then
the lightning gleams from the center of the gloom, then the fire-bolt
flies forth and smites the coronal once so glorious, and dashes it in hot
dust to the Earth, and the tall stalk--so upright, so delicate, so like a
well-trained life--reels, totters and falls in an infinite crash!

Is it true?

Every word of it. True now--may be true in thee and me, O man, so assured
of stability and immovableness. There is danger in high places. Is
there a Spirit which hates all noble-mindedness and seeks to level the
spiritual pile with mean things? Evil Spirit! The very Devil--hating all
goodness because hating God!

But stop.

After all, who smote the pillar? Whose lightning was used to overthrow
the fair masonry?

O God of gods, the devil’s Creator and Master, without whom Satan could
not be, nor hell, nor trees forbidden, nor blast of death--O Mystery of
Being--what can our souls say in their groaning? And how, through anguish
so intolerable, can they pray?

I am afraid to build, because the higher the tower the more deadly the
fall. Dost Thou watch our rising towers and delight to rain Thy fires on
them, lest our pride should abound and our damnation be aggravated by
our vanity?

And God’s own Book it is that tells the good man’s pains, and that
revels in swelling rhetoric over the rottenness and despair of the man
who feared God and eschewed evil! And what unguided hands--if hands
unguided--set the tale of wrong and woe and sorrow next to the very
Psalter? Is not the irony immoral, because cruel? Or is there meaning in
all this?

Is it Life’s story down to the very letter and jot of reality? How better
to come out of the valley than to the harping and song of musicians who
have known the way of the Almighty and tasted the counsels of Heaven?

Cheer thee, O poor soul! Thou art today miserable as Job, but tomorrow
thou mayest dance to the music of David. Tomorrow thou mayest have a harp
of thine own.

A tree of the Lord’s right hand planting arises loftily and broadly in
the warm air. Birds twitter and sing as they flit through its warp and
woof of light and shade. It is a tree whose leaves might heal the nations.

What sudden wind makes it writhe? What Spirit torments every branch and
leaf? What Demon yells in triumph as the firm trunk splits and falls in
twain? Was it grown for such a fate as this?

Better if the seed had been crushed and thrown into the fire than that it
should have been thus reared and perfected and then put to shame among
the trees of the field.

Who can give speech to this flood as it plunges from rock to rock in the
black night time? Hush! There is a man’s voice in the infinite storm:
“Let the day perish in which I was born! Let it be darkness; let that
night be joyless, let no song enter into it; let them who curse the day
stigmatize it who are ready to stir up the leviathan. Why died I not
from the womb? Then had I lain down and been quiet; I had slept; … there
the wicked cease from troubling, and there the wearied mighty rest;
the prisoners sweetly repose together, they hear not the voice of the
exactor, and the slave is free from his lord.”

These are human words, but are they not too strong, too rhetorical, to be
true?

No! For who can mechanize the rhetoric of woe?

“Why is life given to the miserable, and to one who would be blithe to
find a grave? I have no quiet, no repose, for trouble on trouble came,
and my sighs gush out like waters long dammed back.”

No doubt the rhetoric is lofty, yet with a strange familiarity it touches
with happy expressiveness all that is most vivid in our remembrance of
woe.

“I loathe my life. I will give loose to my complaint. I will speak in the
bitterness of my soul. To God I will say: ‘Condemn me not. Show me why
Thou contendest with me. As the clay Thou hast fashioned me, and to dust
Thou causest me to return. Thou hast poured me as milk and compacted me
as cheese. As a fierce lion Thou huntest me; then Thou turnest again and
showest Thyself marvelous.’”

Job has found fit words for all mourning souls. So they borrow of him
when their own words fail like a stream which the Sun has dried up. What
woe the poor little heart can feel! Herein is its greatness. It is, in
its own way, as the heart of God.

“Truly, now, He hath worn me out. Thou hast made all my household
desolate, and Thou hast shriveled me up. God giveth me up to the ungodly,
and flingeth me over into the hands of the wicked. He seized me by the
throat and shook me. He breacheth me with breach on breach. He rusheth on
me like a man of war.”

In what good man’s sick chamber is not Job welcome? Welcome because he
can utter the whole gamut of human woe. He can find words for the heart
that is ill at ease, and prayers for lips which have been chilled and
silenced by unbelief. His woe belongs to the whole world. All other woe
is as the dripping of an icicle compared with the rush of stormy waters.

In the case of Job the internal is proved to be greater than the
external. When the trials came one after another like shocks of thunder,
“in all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly.”

But did he speak? That is the point. If he did not, perhaps he was dazed.
He felt a tremendous blow on the forehead, and he reeled, and was not in
a condition to bear witness about the matter. If he said any thing, let
us know what he did say. Could he speak in that tremendous crisis?

Yes, he spoke. His words are before us. Like a wise man, he went back to
first principles. He said:

“Circumstances are nothing; they are temporary arrangements. The man
is not what he has, but what he is. I do not hold my life in my hands,
saying ‘It weighs so much,’ and count up to a high number.”

Job went back to first principles--back to elementary truths. He said:

“Naked came I out of my mother’s womb, and naked shall I return thither
[that is, as I began]. The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away [as He
had a right to do; I had nothing of my own]. Blessed be the name of the
Lord.”

Could Job look over the ages that have been healed and comforted by his
example--stimulated to bear the ills of this life by the grateful memory
of his invincible patience--surely, even now, in Heaven, he would be
taking the reward of his long-continued and noble endurance of the divine
visitation.

It may be so with you, poor man or woman. You do not get all the sweet
now. This shall be a memory to you in Heaven, long ages hence. The
wrestling you have now may minister to you high delight, keen enjoyment
and rapture pure and abiding. Who can tell when God’s rewards end? Who
will venture to say: “This is the measure of His benediction?”

God is able to give and to do abundantly beyond all that we ask or think.
Should any one inquire of you as to your compensation, say: “It is given
by instalments--today and tomorrow, in death; in the resurrection, all
through the ages of eternity. Ask me thousands of ages hence, and I will
reply to your question concerning compensation.”

Life is not limited by the cradle and the tomb, and it is not between
these two mean and near points that great questions are to be discussed
or determined.

Job has been read by countless readers. His was, of course, a public
trial--a tragedy that was wrought out for the benefit of multitudes in
all generations. Nevertheless, it is literally and pathetically true that
every man, even the most obscure, has his readers--fewer in number, it
may be, but equally earnest in attention.

Think you that your children are not taking notice of you--seeing how you
bear your temptations, difficulties and anxieties?

Think you not that your eldest boy is kept away from the table of the
Lord because you are as atheistic in sorrow as ever Voltaire was?

Do you know that your daughter hates the church because her pious father
is only pious in the three Summer months of the year? He curls under the
cold and biting wind as much as any Atheist ever did. Therefore, the
girl says: “He is a sham and a hypocrite--my father in the flesh, but no
relative of mine in the spirit.”

You have your readers. The little Bible of your life is read in your
kitchen, in your parlor, in your shop and in your warehouse; and if you
do not bear your trials, anxieties and difficulties with a Christian
chivalry and heroism, what is there but mockery on Earth and gloating in
hell?

May God give us grace to bear chastisement nobly and serenely; bless us
with the peace which passeth understanding--with the quietness kindred to
the calm of God; help us when death is in the house, when poverty is on
the hearth-stone.

When there is a storm blinding the only poor little window we have, let
us say: “Though He slay me, yet will I trust in Him. If I perish I will
pray, and perish only here.” That is Christianity--not some clever
chatter and able controversy about metaphysical points; but noble temper,
high behavior, faultless constancy and an invincible fortitude in the
hour of trial and in the agony of pain.


MICAIAH.

Micaiah was the son of Imlah, a prophet of Samaria, who, in the last year
of the reign of Ahab, king of Israel, predicted his defeat and death, B.
C. 897. This was three years after the great battle with Ben-hadad, king
of Syria, in which the extraordinary number of 100,000 Syrian soldiers
is said to have been slain, without reckoning the 27,000 who, it is
asserted, were killed by the falling of the wall at Aphek.

Ahab had proposed to Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, that they should jointly
go up to battle against Ramoth-gilead, which Ben-hadad was bound by
treaty to restore to Ahab.

Jehoshaphat assented in cordial words to the proposal, but he suggested
that they should first “inquire at the word of Jehovah.” Accordingly,
Ahab assembled four hundred prophets, while in an open space at the gate
of the city of Samaria he and Jehoshaphat sat in royal robes to meet and
consult them.

The prophets gave a unanimously favorable response. Among them was
Zedekiah, the son of Chenaanah. He made horns of iron as a symbol, and
announced, as from Jehovah, that with those horns Ahab would push the
Syrians till he consumed them. For some reason which is unexplained, and
can now only be conjectured, King Jehoshaphat was dissatisfied with the
answer, and asked if there was no other prophet of Jehovah at Samaria.

Ahab replied that there was yet one--Micaiah, the son of Imlah; but in
words which obviously call to mind a passage in the “Iliad” (i. 106),
he added: “I hate him, for he does not prophesy good concerning me, but
evil.”

Nevertheless, Micaiah was sent for; and after a vain attempt had been
made to tamper with him, he first expressed an ironical concurrence with
the four hundred prophets, and then boldly foretold the defeat of Ahab’s
army and the death of Ahab.

In contradiction of the false four hundred, Micaiah said he had seen
Jehovah sitting on His throne, and all the host of Heaven standing by
Him--on His right hand and on His left. He said Jehovah asked: “Who
shall persuade Ahab to go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead?” A Spirit came
forth and volunteered to do so. On being asked “Wherewithal?” the Spirit
answered that he would go forth and be a lying Spirit in the mouth of all
the prophets.

Irritated by the account of this vision, Zedekiah struck Micaiah on the
cheek.

Then Ahab ordered that Micaiah be taken to prison, and be fed on bread
and water till his return to Samaria. But Ahab was killed, and Micaiah’s
fate is unknown.

This incident is found in both the first Book of Kings and in the second
Book of Chronicles.

[Illustration: The Cross From the Painting by Gustave Dore.]

[Illustration: MOSES IN THE BULRUSHES.--Exodus, ii.]


MOSES.

Moses loses nothing by diffuseness. Even in days that were made long
by intolerable monotony--in which men lived centuries because of
weariness--Moses did not shrink from a condensation unparalleled in human
literature.

Considered as embracing the history of one month only, the third Book
of Moses may claim to be the most remarkable book in the Old Testament.
Containing twenty-seven chapters, ranging its contents under sixteen
different categories, and requiring to be actively represented within the
space of twenty-eight days--it may, in its own degree, claim an energy
not inferior to the Book of Genesis.

The same fearlessness of treatment is distinctive of both books.
The reverent audacity which represented creation as the work of six
days--whatever the measure of a day may be--did not shrink from
focalizing into one month the whole discipline of life.

Moses’ words could hardly have been fewer if he had lived in our time of
feverish haste and tumult. To put up the Heavens and the Earth in one
chapter was a miracle in authorship. Yet, well pondered, it was the only
thing to be done. Any poet could have built them in endless stanzas, and
any philosopher could have begun the infinite story in a book too large
for the world to hold.

Moses chose the more excellent way, creating creation with a swiftness
that has dazed a literal criticism ever since--literal criticism that
has but one season in its dreary year, a year that knows nothing of
snow-blossom or wedded light and song. But this very haste was part of
the man.

The Moses of Poetry required fifty-one days for the revolution of his
“Iliad”; the Moses of Revelation only took a week for the settlement of
the Heavens and the Earth, and in that week he found one whole day of
rest for the Creator.

This action was entirely characteristic of Moses, for he was the most
wrathful man as well as the meekest--killing, smiting, destroying and
burning with anger, as well as praying like the father-priest of his
people.

In a sense obvious enough he was the protoplastic Christ--for was not
he who described himself as “meek and lowly in heart” the scourger of
trespassers, and did he not burn the religious actors of his day?

Moses and Christ both did things with most startling rapidity. In their
very soul they were akin. They were “straitened” until their work was
“accomplished.” The Pentateuch and the Gospels have action enough in them
to fill innumerable volumes, yet there is an infinite calm in both--the
haste being in the temporary framework, the calm being in the eternal
purpose.

Think of these twenty-seven chapters constituting the discipline of one
month! The reflections started by this circumstance culminate in a sense
of pain, for who can bear this grievous toil or endure this sting of
accusation? There is no respite.

Egyptian burdens were for the body, but these wilderness exactions
tormented the soul, and by so doing made Egyptian memories bright. The
trial of muscle is nothing to the trial of patience. Men may sleep
after labor, but an unquiet conscience keeps the eyes wide open. This
discipline afflicted both the body and the soul, and thus drained the
entire strength of the people.

This conscious toil must have been accompanied by unconscious
inspiration--a reciprocal action impossible in theory but well understood
in spiritual experience.

We resume our burdens in the very act of dreading them. We pray the next
prayer in the very process of waiting for answers to a thousand prayers
to which God has paid no known heed. Yesterday’s sacrifice has nothing to
do with this day’s sin, except to remind us that today must provide its
own sacrifice.

This was so with the Jews; this is precisely so with ourselves. Yet we
boast our liberty, and suppose that in leaping one inch from the Earth we
have broken the tether of gravitation.

As put before us in this manual called Leviticus, the discipline of the
month seems to be more than we could endure; and this we say in ignorance
of the fact that our own manual imposes a more severe discipline. Our
pity for the Jews arises out of the apparently ineradicable sophism that
spiritual service is easier than bodily exercise. A most deadly sophism
is this, and prevalent yet, notwithstanding the rebuke and condemnation
of universal history.

In no spiritual sense is Leviticus an obsolete book. Moses is not dead.
The inventors of the alphabet have some rights even in “Paradise Lost,”
and quite a large property in “Euclid.” It is not grateful on our part to
forget the primers through which we passed to the encyclopedias, though
their authors were but our intellectual nurses. In no mere dream was
Moses present when Christ communed with Him concerning the Exodus that
was to be accomplished at Jerusalem, and in no dramatic sense did Elijah
watch the consummation of prophecy.

The wonder is that Christians should be so willing to regard the
Pentateuch as obsolete. This is practically a foregone conclusion--to
such an extent, certainly, that the Pentateuch is tolerated rather than
studied for edification by the rank and file of Christians.

Without the Pentateuch, Christ as revealed in the Gospels would have been
impossible; and without Christ the Pentateuch would have been impossible.

I venture upon this proposition because I find no great-event in the
Pentateuch that is not for some purpose of argument or illustration used
by Christ or by His disciples and apostles in the interests of what is
known as evangelical truth.

It lies within easy proof that Christ is the text of the Old Testament
and that the Old Testament is the text of Christ. What use is made in
the New Testament of the creation of the universe, the faith of Abraham,
the rain of manna, the lifting up of the serpent and the tabernacle of
witness! The sublime apology of Stephen epitomizes the Old Testament, and
the Epistle to the Hebrews could not have been written but for the ritual
of Exodus and Leviticus. In its purely moral tone the Old Testament is of
kindred quality with the New.

Take an instance from Leviticus. Three forms of evil are recognized in
one of its most ardent chapters--namely, Violence, Deceit and Perjury.
This is a succession amounting to a development, and, unwittingly it
may or may not be, confirming that law of evolution which is as happily
illustrated in morals as in physics.

Men begin with acts of violence, then go on to silent deceit and
calculation, and close with a profanation of the holiest terms. The early
sinners robbed gardens and killed brothers; the later sinners “agreed
together” to “lie unto God.” It is something, therefore, to find in so
ancient a book as Leviticus recognition of an order which is true to
philosophy and to history.

But the proof that Moses and Christ are identical in moral tone is to
be found in the process which offenders were commanded to adopt. By
no sacerdotal jugglery was the foul blot to be removed; by no sigh of
selfishness could the inward corruption be permitted to evaporate; by no
investment of cheap tears could thieves compound for felony.

First, there must be restoration; second, there must be an addition of
a fifth part of the whole; third, the priest must be faced as the very
representative of God and a trespass offering be laid on the altar. After
atonement forgiveness would come--a white angel from Heaven--and dwell
in the reclaimed and sanctified heart. All the past would be driven
away as a black cloud and all the present filled with a light above the
brightness of the Sun.

What is this but an outline or forecast of what Christ said when He
drove the hostile and vindictive man from the altar, bidding him first
be reconciled with his brother and at peace with society? Christianity
is not a substitute for morality; it is morality inspired, glorified
and crowned. Say that the ritual was sanitary rather than doctrinal or
theological. What then? All divine things are first sanitary, but not
necessarily bounded by that term.

It will be found that the practice of genuine cleanness, chemical as well
as mechanical, will be followed by a philosophy, and that the morality of
cleanness will be followed by a theology.

Accustom a man to look out for bullocks and rams and lambs “without
blemish,” and he will find that he can not stop at that point. He has
begun an education which can only culminate in the prayer: “Create in me
a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me.” Yet no word of
that holy thought was named in the original instructions.

Leviticus is the gospel of the Pentateuch--glistening with purity,
turning law into music and spreading a banquet in the wilderness. But its
ritual is dead. This is hard to believe--hard because religious vanity is
fond of ritualism, which makes no demand on the conscience. Yet ritualism
had a divinely appointed function in the education of the awakening mind,
and was the only influence which could hold the attention of a people to
whom freedom was a new experience.

Spectacular religion is alphabetic religion; therefore, to revert to it
is to ignore every characteristic and impulse of manhood and progress.
But they who say so be prepared to complete the philosophy which that
contention initiates.

It is not enough to dismiss ritualism on the ground that it has been
displaced by spiritual worship. Admit that such is the case, and other
and broader admissions are involved in the plea, and can only be shirked
at the expense of consistency.

It is generally admitted, for example, that the Old Testament law has
been displaced by a New Testament principle. So Ritualism and Law, in
their ancient forms, have passed away. But let us be careful. When we say
Ritualism and Law, we mean in reality the letter, and it is evident that
if any one letter can be displaced every other letter may be outlived and
completed. And what is “the letter” but a symbol of flesh--visibleness,
objectivity, historic fact and bulk?

Apostle Paul went so far as to say that even Christ was no longer known
“after the flesh”--yea, though He had been known after the flesh, that
kind of knowledge was for ever done away, and another knowledge had
permanently taken its place.

The Church has never adopted the whole meaning of that teaching. Willing
enough to consign Leviticus to the shades, the Church still clings to
some sort of bodily Christ--the figure of a man--a bulk to be at least
imaginatively touched. This is easily accounted for without suggesting
superstition, and yet it might be done away with without imperiling
faith. We are held in bondage by a mistaken conception of personality.
When we think of that term we think of ourselves.

But even admitting the necessity of this, we may by a correct definition
of personality acquire a higher conception of our own being. Instead of
saying personality is this or that, after the manner of a geometrical
figure, binding it to four points and otherwise limiting it, say that
personality is the unit of being, and instantly every conception is
enlarged and illuminated--the meaning being that personality is the
starting point of conscious existence; not the fullness, but the outline;
not the maximum, but the minimum; the very smallest conception which the
mind can lay hold of--the Euclidic point, to be carried on into ratios
and dimensions which originate a new vocabulary.

We do not, then, define “God” when we describe Him as a “Person,” but
we merely begin to define Him; in other words, we say that God can not
be less than a Person. What more He is, we must gradually and adoringly
discover.

So far as Christ is concerned, there is one enlargement of His
personality which no school of thinkers will dispute. This is
rhetorically expressed by M. Renan, when he says of Jesus:

“A thousand times more living, a thousand times more loved, since Thy
death than during the days of Thy pilgrimage here below, Thou wilt become
to such a degree the Corner-Stone of humanity that to tear Thy name from
this world would be to shake it to its foundations.”

If ritualism has been displaced by spirituality, and if law has been
suspended by a principle--in other words, if the local has made way for
the universal--why shrink from the admission that limited Personality has
been exchanged for unlimited Influence?

How would Moses regard nineteenth century worship--say, of a Low Church
and Evangelical type, as the true evolution of Leviticus? Where is the
resemblance? The eye that can see the similitude is surely looking
through an adapted medium. Yet the mystery would be dissolved if the Book
of Leviticus were not open to reference.

The man is the completion of the child, but the child is no longer in
existence.

The fruit is the fulfillment of the blossom, but the blossom is no longer
available for comparison and for contrast.

Christianity is the consummation of Leviticus, but Leviticus
remains--unlike the child and the blossom--and offers a series of
dissonances or dissimilarities of the most positive quality.

Yet if Moses were living now he would be unchurched if he refused to
identify the meaning of Leviticus in the service of the Christian
sanctuary--the Papist nearest in gorgeousness, the Protestant claiming to
be nearest in doctrine.

The Nonconformist Moses, in the absence of inspiration, would in this
matter be the arch-heretic of the century.


NEBUCHADNEZZAR.

The moral character of Nebuchadnezzar is not such as entitles him to
our approval. Besides the overweening pride which brought on him such
terrible chastisement, we note a violence and fury common enough in
Oriental monarchs of the weaker kind, but from which the greatest of
them have usually been free; while at the same time we observe a cold
and relentless cruelty that is particularly revolting. The blinding
of Zedekiah may possibly be justified as an ordinary Eastern practice,
though it is the earliest case of the kind on record; but the refinement
of cruelty by which he was made to witness his sons’ execution before his
eyes were put out was more worthy of a Dionysius or a Domitian than of a
really great king.

Again, the detention of Jehoiachin in prison thirty-six years for an
offence committed at the age of eighteen is a severity surpassing
Oriental harshness.

Against these grave faults we have nothing to set, unless it be a
feeble trait of magnanimity in the pardon of Shadrach, Meshach and
Abednego--when he found that he was without power to punish them.

It has been thought remarkable that to a man of this character God should
have vouchsafed a revelation of the future by means of visions. But the
circumstance, however it may disturb our preconceived notions, is not
really at variance with the general laws of God’s providence, as revealed
to us in Scripture.

As with His natural gifts, so with His supernatural gifts--they are not
confined to the worthy. Even under Christianity, miraculous powers were
sometimes possessed by those who made an ill use of them. And God, it
is plain, did not leave the old heathen world without some supernatural
aid, but made His presence felt from time to time in visions, through
prophets, or even by a voice from Heaven.

It is only necessary to refer to the histories of Pharaoh, Abimelech, Job
and Balaam in order to establish the parity of Nebuchadnezzar’s visions
with other facts recorded in the Bible. He was warned, and the nations
over which he ruled were warned through him, God leaving not Himself
“without witness” even in those dark times.

Abydenus, a heathen writer who generally drew his inspiration from
Berosus, ascribes to Nebuchadnezzar a miraculous speech just before his
death, announcing to the Babylonians the speedy coming of “a Persian
mule,” who, with the aid of the Medes, would enslave Babylon.


QUEEN OF SHEBA.

The Queen of Sheba is a model to all inquirers. It was not enough for
her to have heard of the fame of Solomon and to have admired him at a
distance as a unique genius. Her admiration excited her interest and
suspicion, and, being a woman of penetrating mind, she desired to put
riddles and enigmas whereby she could test the proverbial wisdom of
Solomon.

When she arrived at his court she did not put flippant questions to King
Solomon. She rather sought out the most difficult inquiries which she
could possibly make.

It is recorded that Solomon told the queen all her questions, and there
was nothing hid from Solomon which he told her not. She was astounded by
what she heard and what she saw. She declared that the half had not been
told her.

The visit of the Queen of Sheba to Solomon, though not strictly
commercial, arose out of commercial intercourse. The territory of
Sheba, according to Strabo, reached so far north as to meet that of the
Nabathæans, although its proper seat was at the southernmost angle of
Arabia.

The very rich presents made by the queen show the extreme value of her
commerce with the Hebrew monarch. This early interchange of hospitality
derives a peculiar interest from the fact that in much later ages--those
of the Maccabees and downward--the intercourse of the Jews with Sheba
became so intimate and their influence and power so great. Jewish
circumcision took root there, and princes held sway there who were called
Jewish.

The language of Sheba is believed to have been very different from
the literate Arabic; yet, like the Ethiopic, it belonged to the great
Syro-Arabian family, and was not alien to the Hebrew in the same sense
that the Egyptian language was.

The great ease with which the pure monotheism of the Maccabees spread
itself in Sheba gives plausibility to the opinion that even at the time
of Solomon the people of Sheba had much religious superiority over the
Arabs and Syrians in general. If so, it becomes clear how the curiosity
of the southern queen would be worked on by seeing the riches of the
distant monarch, whose purer creed must have been carried everywhere with
them by his sailors and servants.


REHOBOAM.

“So Jeroboam and all Israel came and spake to Rehoboam, saying: ‘Thy
father made our yoke grievous. Now, therefore, ease thou somewhat the
grievous servitude of thy father, and his heavy yoke that he put upon us,
and we will serve thee.’”

A cause so stated must succeed. There will be difficulty, but the end is
assured.

The reasonable always triumphs, due time being given for the elucidation
of its purposes and the manifestation of its real spirit. Violence can
have but a short day; the tempest cries itself to rest.

The speech of this man was a speech strong in reason. “Ease thou somewhat
the grievous servitude of thy father, and his heavy yoke that he put upon
us, and we will serve thee.” They wanted ease for service--for loyalty.
Where there is no ease how can there be homage, thankfulness, devotion or
any of the high qualities of patriotism?

Men who are not disquieted are prone to tell others to bear their burdens
uncomplainingly. We ought to hear what they have to say who feel the
iron. Our inquiry should be: “How does it suit you? What is the effect
of the piercing iron on the soul? How does manhood bear the heel of
oppression?”

The sufferers should sometimes be admitted to the witness-box.

There is a danger lest our personal comfortableness should disqualify us
for judging the case of down-trodden men.

Wherever there is weakness the Christian Church should be found. Wherever
there is reasonableness the Christian sanctuary should offer hospitality.
The Christian sanctuary ceases to be the Tabernacle of God among men when
it shuts its door on the cries of reason, the petitions of weakness, the
humble requests of those who ask for nothing exaggerated, but simply ask
to have their misery mitigated somewhat, that their loyalty may be of a
larger and better quality. The names are ancient, but the circumstances
may be painfully modern.

It is the peculiarity of the Bible that it is always getting in our
way. It has a word on every subject. Is there any thing more detestable
than that a man who has his own way seven days a week, whose footsteps
are marked by prosperity, whose very breathing is a commercial success,
should stand up and tell men who are bleeding at every pore to be quiet
and contented, and not create disturbance in the body politic?

If Jeroboam had come with a petition conceived in another tone it ought
to have been rejected. It would have been irrational, violent and
contemptuous; but the reasonableness of the request will insure its
victory in the long run.

How easy it is to think of Rehoboam as the foolish son of a wise father!
But are we not unjust to the son in so regarding him? Was Solomon the
wise man he is often made out to be? The answer would be: “Yes--No.”
There was no greater fool than Solomon; and he attained his supremacy in
folly because there was no man so wise. “If the light that is in thee be
darkness, how great is that darkness!” “How art thou fallen from Heaven,
O Lucifer, son of the morning!” If he had not been son of the morning
some shallow pit might have held him; but, being son of the morning and
detaching himself from the gravitation of God, the pit into which he
falls is bottomless.

Pliny says no man can be always wise. That is true philosophically and
experimentally; for all men have vulnerable heels, or are exposed to
temptations to lightness of mind, amounting in some instances almost to
frivolity. They are also the subjects of a most singular rebound, which
makes them appear the more frivolous because when we last saw them they
were absorbed in the solemnity of prayer.

Solomon was not wise in this matter of government. The history shows
that the people were appealing, not against Rehoboam, who had yet had no
opportunity of proving his quality as a king, but against his father.
“Thy father made our yoke grievous.” We are prone to copy the defects of
our ancestors and our idols rather than their excellences.

Folly has often more charms for us than wisdom. When Diogenes discoursed
of philosophy his auditors turned away from him, but when he began to
play frivolous music or to sing frivolous songs the crowds thronged about
him, and he said: “Ye gods! How much more popular is folly than wisdom!”
Even there he spoke as a philosopher.

Rehoboam made a cautious reply, and therein he began well. He said to the
petitioners: “Come again unto me after three days.” This looked hopeful.

King Rehoboam utilized the interval by taking counsel with “the old men
who had stood before Solomon, his father, while he yet lived, saying:
‘What counsel give ye me to return answer to this people?’ And they spake
unto him, saying: ‘If thou be kind to this people and please them, and
speak good words to them, they will be thy servants for ever.’”

Rich is the king whose old men talk in such a strain. They were patriots
and philanthropists and philosophers; they were Christians before the
time.

Marvelous is the power of kindness. They will do most in life who are
most considerate. They may be charged with sentimentalism by those who do
not understand the power of human feeling, but they will be given credit
for philosophy by men who understand the genius of sympathy.

What a message would this have been to return to the complaining people!
If, when the people returned after three days, Rehoboam had spoken so,
the welkin would have rung with the resonant cheers of a delighted and
thankful people. Kindness is not weakness.

But Rehoboam forsook the counsel which the old men gave him, and took
counsel with the young men who had been brought up with him and who stood
before him. He asked them the same question he had asked the old men.
Their answer was:

“Say unto them: ‘My little finger shall be thicker than my father’s
loins. For, whereas my father put a heavy yoke upon you, I will put more
to your yoke. My father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you
with scorpions.’”

Woe to the nation whose young men talked so! A young oppressor is an
infant devil. Young men talking so will ruin any occasion.

Are there such things in history as retorts, reprisals, rebounds and
consequences? Let it be known and laid down as the basic principle of all
action--social, ecclesiastical and imperial--that there is no right of
tyranny.

It might be supposed that the king had taken a most patriotic course in
consulting the young and the old. He had done nothing of the kind. He had
omitted to consult Him who had called his house to the royalty.

Rehoboam should have consulted the King Maker whose throne is on the
circle of the Earth, whose scepter touches the horizon and whose will is
the law of both monarchy and commonwealth.

The greater the man, the nearer should he stand to God; yea, he should
be within whisper-reach of the Lord of lords, asking Him in every crisis
of national history what Israel ought to do--what the country ought to
answer--what is the will of Heaven.

Rehoboam answered the people roughly, and forsook the counsel of the old
men. “So the king hearkened not unto the people.”

The Gospel never gives liberty to oppression. Employers may adopt this
course if they please, but they will find it end in ruin. We must
recognize the difference between employing cattle and employing men.
A parent may adopt this course of Rehoboam, if he so chooses, but his
children will chastise him and sting him with many a disappointment; or,
if he does not live to see the wreck of their manhood, they will execrate
his unfragrant memory.

Rehoboam will be punished; have no fear of that. “With what measure ye
mete, it shall be measured to you again.” You can make your whips thongs
of scorpions, but on your own back shall the lacerating lash be laid; you
can play the fantastic trick before high Heaven and make the angels weep,
but the bitterness shall be yours. The triumphing of such a policy is
short, and the end is everlasting punishment.


SHISHAK.

Shishak was a king of Egypt contemporary with Jeroboam, to whom he gave
an asylum when he fled from Solomon. This was indicative of his politic
disposition to encourage the weakening of the neighboring kingdom, the
growth of which under David and Solomon was probably regarded by the
kings of Egypt with some alarm.

After Jeroboam had become king of Israel, and probably at his suggestion,
Shishak invaded the kingdom of Judah (B. C. 971) at the head of an
immense army, and after having taken the fortified places advanced
against Jerusalem.

Satisfied with the submission of Rehoboam and with the immense spoils
of the Temple, the king of Egypt withdrew without imposing any onerous
conditions on the humbled grandson of David.

Shishak has been identified as the first king of the twenty-second or
Diospolitan dynasty, the Sesonchis of profane history. His name has been
found on the Egyptian monuments in the form of Sheshonk. He is said to
have been of Ethiopian origin, and it is thought that, with the aid of
the military caste, he dethroned the Pharaoh who gave his daughter to
Solomon.


SOLOMON.

The first prominent scene in the reign of Solomon is one which presents
his character in its noblest aspect. There were two holy places which
divided the reverence of the people--the ark and its provisional
tabernacle at Jerusalem and the original Tabernacle of the Congregation,
which, after many wanderings, was then pitched at Gibeon.

It was thought right that the new king should offer solemn sacrifices at
both.

After those at Gibeon there came that vision of the night which has in
all ages borne its noble witness to the hearts of rulers.

Not for riches, long life or victory over enemies did the son of
David--then, at least, true to his high calling, feeling himself as “a
little child” in comparison with the vastness of his work--offer his
supplications, but for a “wise and understanding heart,” that he might
judge the people.

The “speech pleased the Lord.”

There came in answer the promise of a wisdom “like which there had been
none before--like which there should be none after.” So far all was
well. The prayer was a right and noble one. Yet there is also a contrast
between it and the prayers of David which accounts for many other
contrasts.

The desire of David’s heart is not chiefly for wisdom, but for holiness.
He is conscious of an oppressing evil, and seeks to be delivered from it.
He repents and falls, and repents again.

Solomon asks only for wisdom. He has a lofty ideal before him, and seeks
to accomplish it, but he is as yet haunted by no deeper yearnings, and
speaks as one who has no need of repentance.

Then began Solomon’s marvelous development as a builder and statesman.

He was not content to build the house of the Lord alone. This is a
remarkable circumstance, as illustrating the spirit which is created and
sustained by all truly religious exercises. It would have been ambition
enough for any man religiously uninspired to have erected such an edifice
as the Temple. Most men are contented to do one thing, and to rest their
fame on its peculiar excellence.

Having completed the house of the Lord and his own house, Solomon began
to build the cities which Huram had restored to him, and to cause the
children of Israel to dwell there.

A religion that ends only in ceremony building is little better than
a superstition. No man can be zealously affected in the interests of
the Church without having his whole philanthropic spirit enlarged and
ennobled, so that he may become a builder of cities as well as a builder
of churches. It must be remembered, on the other hand, that he who builds
a synagogue really helps to build the town in which it is located. A
synagogue, temple or church is not to be looked on in its singularity,
as if it were so many walls, with so many doors and so many windows. A
church is a representative institution, through which should flow rivers
that will fertilize all the districts of the city--rivers of knowledge,
rivers of charity, rivers of brotherhood, rivers of co-operation--so that
men should turn to the Church, assured that every rational and healthy
expectation would be satisfied by its provisions.

Having completed for the time being the measure of building on which his
mind was set, Solomon went forth to war.

It would seem as if, in ancient days, kings could not be satisfied to
dwell at peace. Even Solomon, whose very name signifies peace, had in
him the military spirit which was characteristic of his race and time;
it was in him, indeed, as the word of the living God. Solomon did not go
forth to war for the sake of war; he believed he was obeying a divinely
implanted instinct, or carrying out to the letter some divinely written
law.

Having passed through another military period, King Solomon began once
more to build. He built Tadmor, and all the store cities; he built
Beth-horon the Upper and Beth-horon the Lower, and fenced cities with
walls, gates and bars.

A busy time it was in the reign of Solomon. But even all this building is
not without its suggestion of a corresponding evil.

Why were the cities fenced? Why the gates? Why the bars? We have
instances of the same kind in our own civilization--silent witnesses
against the honesty of the society in which we live. Every bolt on the
door is a moral accusation; every time we turn the lock we mean that
there is an enemy outside who may endeavor to violate the sanctity of the
house.

We sometimes forget the moral suggestiveness even of our commonest
institutions and plans of procedure. Every precaution that is taken for
our preservation implies the presence of hostile elements in the society
that is round about us.

Solomon may be taken in this instance as representing the great doctrine
that men should seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and
afterward attend to minor matters, or even leave those minor matters to
the adjustment of providence.

Solomon is represented as first most anxious about the Temple, giving
himself wholly to its erection, occupying his thoughts night and day,
turning every thing to account in its relation to the Temple. Having
finished that marvelous structure, he was prepared to descend to other
levels and do the commoner work which lay to his hand.

Many persons leave the temple half finished. What wonder if they go out
to the war and return wounded and disabled? Our religious purposes are
broken off. What wonder if our political ends pierce us and sting us by
way of retribution?

“But of the children of Israel did Solomon make no servants for his work;
but they were men of war, and chief of his captains, and captains of his
chariots and horsemen.”

The statesmanship of Solomon is as distinctly proved by this arrangement
as by any thing we have yet seen in his whole policy. Solomon knew that
one man was not as good as another, however much democratic philosophy
may have endeavored to prove the contrary. One man is a genius, but
another man is a slave--an imitator, a hewer of wood; very serviceable,
and in fact indispensable, but not adorned with the very highest
excellence and dignity of mind.

Solomon made a distribution of classes, saying in effect that some men
can do the drudgery, some men can dig and build, some can pull down and
take away and make ready for the exertions of others; the higher class
of men can think and direct, for they are inspired with the genius of
administration, and are men of powerful mind, of fertile resources in
government and in war. So Solomon made the best use of the material at
his disposal--not getting great men to do small work or setting small men
to fail in great work.

Adaptation is the secret of success. For want of knowing this, many men
fail in life.

There are employers who are making themselves but little better than
toilers, when they might by an expenditure of money apparently distinctly
not economical very greatly assist the progress and solidity of their
fortunes. A man may be industrious in a way which involves the absolute
frittering and humiliation of his energies.

We are to be careful not only to be industrious, but industrious about
the right things and in the right proportion. A man might slave himself
to death cutting down wood or in throwing away stones, but if some other
man of inferior mental faculty could be employed to do that work the
superior man should turn his attention to other and nobler pursuits, and
thus with smaller expenditure of strength he might be doing immeasurably
greater good.

If the thinker is not to degrade himself to the level of a drudge,
neither is the drudge to attempt to force his way to positions for which
he is not qualified. Nothing is mean that is not meanly done.

The Canaanites might be as useful as the Israelites in their own way.
With the eye of a statesman and with the inspiration of a genius, Solomon
saw that he must distribute and classify men, and set each man to do that
for which he was best fitted. Even Solomon could not do all the work
alone.

“And Solomon brought up the daughter of Pharaoh out of the city of David
unto the house that he had built for her; for he said: ‘My wife shall not
dwell in the house of David, king of Israel, because the places are holy
whereunto the ark of the Lord hath come.’”

This may be taken as an instance of punctilious morality. We are not
able to understand all that was involved in the incident. Evidently
we are in the presence of conscience working under some eccentric law
or suggestion. Yet here is a conscience, and by so much the action of
Solomon is to be respected. He will not have any place or institution
even ceremonially defiled. He will go back to precedents; he will consult
the genius of history; he will preserve the consistency of the royal
policy. Solomon felt that the ark of the Lord had sanctified every
locality into which it had come, and that a broad distinction must always
be maintained between heathenism and Judaism--between the idols of pagan
lands and the Spirit of the living God.

In these matters Solomon’s wisdom was displayed as certainly as in the
greater concerns of State and Church. We are to remember that at the
beginning Solomon was endowed with the spirit of wisdom and of a sound
mind. The Lord quickened his sagacity and gave him that marvelous insight
which enabled him to penetrate into the interiors and cores which were
hidden from the scrutiny of other men.

We are, therefore, to give Solomon credit for being at once wise and
conscientious; we are to see in his action the working of a tender
conscience. Even though he may be appeasing his conscience by some trick
or ceremony, yet he is showing us the working of the moral nature within
the kingly breast.

Yet there is a point to be noted here which is common to human
experience. Why should Solomon have married the daughter of Pharaoh?
Why should he, in the first instance, have placed himself in so vital a
relation to heathenism? Are there not men who first plunge into great
mistakes, and then seek to rectify their position by zealous care about
comparatively trifling details? Do not men make money by base means, and
then most zealously betake themselves to bookkeeping, as if they would
not spend money except in approved directions?

There is nothing more misleading than a conscience that does not rest
on a basis of reason. We are to beware of the creation of a false
conscience, or a partial conscience, or a conscience that operates only
in given directions, but which makes up for sins of a larger kind by
ostentatious devotion at the altar of detail and ceremony and petty
ritual.

“Then Solomon offered burnt offerings unto the Lord on the altar of
the Lord, which he had built before the porch, even after a certain
rate every day, offering according to the commandment of Moses--on the
Sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn feasts, three times
in the year, even in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of
weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles.”

Solomon was great in burnt offerings. Do not men sometimes make up
in burnt offerings what they lack in moral consistency? Is not an
ostentatious religion the best proof of internal decay? It ought not to
be so.

The hand and the heart should be one; the outward and the inward should
correspond; the action should be the incarnation of the thought. We are
not always to look on the ceremonial action of the Church as indicative
of its real spirituality.

Solomon did not live to a very great age, since he was not more than
twenty years old when he ascended the throne. Whether Solomon turned to
the Lord again with all his heart--a question widely discussed by the
older commentators--can not be ascertained from the Scriptures.

If the Preacher (Koheleth) is traceable to Solomon so far as the leading
thoughts are concerned, we should find in this fact an evidence of his
conversion, or at least a proof that at the close of his life Solomon
discovered the vanity of all earthly possessions and aims, and even
declared the fear of God to be the only abiding good with which a man can
stand before the judgment of God.

The Temple of Solomon was, according to our ideas of size, a small
building. It was less than one hundred and twenty feet long, and less
than thirty-five feet broad; in other words, it was not so large as
one of the ordinary parish churches of our own land. Much less did it
approach to the size of the colossal buildings in Babylon or Egypt.
But in Jewish eyes, at the time that it was built, it may have been
“great”--that is to say, it may have exceeded the dimensions of any
single separate building existing in Palestine up to the time of its
erection. It may even have been larger than the buildings which the
neighboring nations had erected to their respective gods.

Ancient worship was mainly in the open air, and the temples were viewed
as shrines for the Deity and for His priests--not as buildings in which
worshipers were to congregate. Hence their comparatively small size.

“And Solomon slept with his fathers, and he was buried in the city of
David, his father; and Rehoboam, his son, reigned in his stead.”

This seems to be a lame and impotent conclusion. Yet it distinctly sets
forth the common humanity of this most extraordinary and brilliant king.
Literally, the passage means that Solomon lay down with his fathers. He
might hardly be recognized from the humblest of them. The Sun dies at
evening with scarcely a reminder of the glory which shone from him at
mid-day.


BASELESS PRIDE.

(This pride-humbling survey of man and his destiny was written by William
Knox, a Scotchman.)

    Oh, why should the spirit of mortal be proud?
    Like a swift fleeting meteor, a fast flying cloud,
    A flash of the lightning, a break of the wave,
    Man passes from life to his rest in the grave.

    The leaves of the oak and the willow shall fade,
    Be scattered around, and together be laid;
    And the young and the old and the low and the high
    Shall molder to dust, and together shall lie.

    The infant a mother attended and loved,
    The mother that infant’s affection who proved,
    The husband that mother and infant who blessed--
    Each and all are away to their dwellings of rest.

    The maid on whose cheek, on whose brow, in whose eye,
    Shone beauty and pleasure--her triumphs are by;
    And the memory of those who loved her and praised
    Is alike from the minds of the living erased.

    The hand of the king that the scepter has borne,
    The brow of the priest that the miter has worn,
    The eye of the sage and the heart of the brave
    Are hidden and lost in the depths of the grave.

    The peasant whose lot was to sow and to reap,
    The herdsman who climbed with his goats up the steep,
    The beggar who wandered in search of his bread,
    Have faded away like the grass that we tread.

    The saint who enjoyed the communion of Heaven,
    The sinner who dared to remain unforgiven,
    The wise and the foolish, the guilty and just,
    Have quietly mingled their bones in the dust.

    So the multitude goes--like the flower or the weed
    That withers away to let others succeed;
    So the multitude comes--even those we behold--
    To repeat every tale that has often been told.

    For we are the same our fathers have been;
    We see the same sights our fathers have seen;
    We drink the same stream, we view the same Sun,
    And run the same course our fathers have run.

    The thoughts we are thinking our fathers would think;
    From the death we are shrinking our fathers would shrink;
    To the life we are clinging they also would cling--
    But it speeds from us all like a bird on the wing.

    They loved--but the story we can not unfold;
    They scorned--but the heart of the haughty is cold;
    They grieved--but no wail from their slumber will come;
    They joyed--but the tongue of their gladness is dumb.

    They died--aye, they died--and we things that are now,
    That walk on the turf that lies o’er their brow
    And make in their dwellings a transient abode,
    Meet the things that they met on their pilgrimage road.

    Yea, hope and despondency, pleasure and pain,
    Are mingled together in sunshine and rain;
    And the smile and the tear, the song and the dirge,
    Still follow each other, like surge upon surge.

    ’Tis the wink of an eye--’tis the draught of a breath--
    From the blossom of health to the paleness of death,
    From the gilded saloon to the bier and the shroud!
    Oh, why should the spirit of mortal be proud?




BOOKS PUBLISHED BY THOS. W. JACKSON PUB. CO.

CHICAGO, ILL.


All Handsomely Bound in the Best American and English Cloth, Uniform in
Style of Binding--Together They Make a Handsome Library--Separately, They
Make Handsome Center-Table Volumes.

PRICE, SENT POST-PAID, $1.50 EACH.

Thirty-One Years on the Plains and in the Mountains; or, The Last Voice
from the Plains--An authentic record of a life time of hunting, trapping,
scouting and Indian fighting in the Far West. Copiously illustrated by
H. S. De Lay and by many reproductions from photographs. By Capt. W. F.
Drannan, who went on to The Plains when fifteen years old.

Rough Life on the Frontier.--A True and Graphic tale of the Doing and
Daring of the Men who pushed Westward in the early days of our country’s
life; told by a man who was one of them, and shared their struggles,
hardships and final success. Copiously illustrated with 23 full page
engravings from original drawings by H. S. De Lay. 530 pages.

Life in the Mines; or, Crime Avenged.--Including thrilling adventures
among miners and outlaws, the mystery of the Phantom Horseman and the
dark concoctions of One-Eyed Riley. By C. H. Simpson, author of “Wild
Life in the Far West,” “A Yankee’s Adventures in South Africa,” etc.
Copiously illustrated by H. S. De Lay.

Elegantly Cloth Bound Books, $1.50 per Copy

Pearls from Many Seas.--A collation of the best thoughts of 400
writers of wide repute. Selected and classified by Rev. J. B. McClure.
Illustrated with 50 full-page engravings selected especially for this
work from the great art galleries of the world. A volume of rare value
and interest to all lovers of good literature. Reading matter, 528 pages.

Evils of the Cities.--By T. De Witt Talmage, D. D. The author, in company
with the proper detectives, visited many of the most vile and wicked
places in New York City and Brooklyn, ostensibly looking for a thief,
but in reality taking notes for a series of discourses, published in
this volume, which contains a full and graphic description of what he
saw and the lessons drawn therefrom. The Doctor has also extended his
observations to the “Summer Resorts,” the “Watering Places,” the “Races,”
etc., all of which are popularized from his standpoint in this volume.
Reading matter, 397 pages.

A Yankee’s Adventures in South America.--(In the diamond country.) By
C. H. Simpson. Giving the varied experiences, adventures, dangers and
narrow escapes of a Yankee seeking his fortune in this wild country, who,
by undaunted courage, perseverance, suffering, fighting and adventures
of various sorts, is requited at last by the ownership of the largest
diamond taken out of the Kimberly mines up to that time and with the
heart and hand of the fairest daughter of a diamond king. Containing 30
full-page illustrations by H. S. De Lay. Reading matter, 234 pages.

Bible Characters.--A collection of Sermons by the most renowned divines
of their times on these subjects; a beautiful and inspiring book that
ought to find its place into every home where good and elevating
literature is sought after. Dwight Lyman Moody, Dr. Talmage, Joseph
Parker, etc.; illustrations from the famous paintings by Gustave Dore.
477 pages reading matter.

The First Mortgage.--A truthful, instructive, pleasing and poetical
presentation of Biblical Stories, History and Gospel Truth. By E.
U. Cook. Fully and handsomely illustrated from the world-renowned
artist, Gustave Dore, the whole forming an exceedingly interesting and
entertaining Poetical Bible. One of the most handsome volumes ever issued
in Chicago. 288 pages.

Helen Blair.--A novel by Nina Miller Elliott. It is a well written and
decidedly interesting story and holds the reader from the first page to
the last.

When the Heart Is Young.--By Nina Miller Elliott. Everyone who has read
“Helen Blair” will want to read “When the Heart Is Young.” It is one of
the best works of fiction brought out in recent years.

Every Woman’s Right.--An exceptionally interesting story by Nina Miller
Elliott. A story full of love and true to life, and every woman will
enjoy reading it.

Peggy Kip.--Nina Miller Elliott’s latest book. A novel that every one
will read and remember with appreciation.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIBLE CHARACTERS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tom, Dick and Harry
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Tom, Dick and Harry

Author: Talbot Baines Reed


        
Release date: April 5, 2007 [eBook #20992]
                Most recently updated: February 6, 2019

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/20992

Credits: Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOM, DICK AND HARRY ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




Tom, Dick and Harry

By Talbot Baines Reed
________________________________________________________________________
Another of this author's well-written and entertaining school books.  In
this case the hero is young Master Jones.  To prepare for entry to the
school he had been given some tuition by a lady who was a teacher at a
girls' school.  Of course the other boys at the boys' school soon found
out that he had come to them from a girls' school, and he became known,
albeit affectionately, by the nickname of "Sarah".

But he is well respected, and enjoys his various friendships with the
other boys, noticing even, at one point, that they seemed to be vieing
with one another for his friendship.

Towards the end of the story his mother visits the school, and is a
great hit with the other boys.

There some moments of drama, amusingly told, such as when our hero is
unwittingly involved in almost blowing the school up!  The boys
involved off are hauled off to the magistrate by the local village
policeman, who, comically, had imagined that a blazer, the top garment
worn by schoolboys of that era (and mine) was a kind of lucifer, which
in turn was a kind of match used before the invention of the
safety-match.  This is a particularly amusing episode, terminating in
the magistrate awarding the school-keeper, who had been slightly
injured, one guinea costs, to pay for his bandages, which he pays out of
his own pocket.

There are no mountain-side dramas as in several other books by this
author, and the rowing episodes on the river are quite tame.  There are
no wicked local beer-house owners.  But it is a good story, quietly and
evenly told.  Best listened to rather than read. NH.
________________________________________________________________________
TOM, DICK AND HARRY

BY TALBOT BAINES REED



CHAPTER ONE.

WHO SHOT THE DOG?

A shot! a yell! silence!

Such, as soon as I could collect myself sufficiently to form an idea at
all, were my midnight sensations as I sat up in my bed, with my chin on
my knees, my hair on end, my body bedewed with cold perspiration, and my
limbs trembling from the tips of my fingers to the points of my toes.

I had been peacefully dreaming--something about an automatic machine
into which you might drop a Latin exercise and get it back faultlessly
construed and written out.  I had, in fact, got to the point of
attempting nefariously to avail myself of its services.  I had folded up
the fiendish exercise on the passive subjunctive which Plummer had set
us overnight, and was in the very act of consigning it to the mechanical
crib, when the shot and the yell projected me, all of a heap, out of
dreamland into the waking world.

At first I was convinced it must have been the sound of my exercise
falling into the machine, and Plummer's howl of indignation at finding
himself circumvented.

No!  Machine and all had vanished, but the noises rang on in my waking
ears.

Was it thunder and storm?  No.  The pale moonlight poured in a gentle
flood through the window, and not a leaf stirred in the elms without.

Was it one of the fellows fallen out of bed?  No.  On every hand reigned
peaceful slumber.  There was Dicky Brown in the next bed, flat on his
back, open-mouthed, snoring monotonously, like a muffled police rattle.
There was Graham minor on the other side, serenely wheezing up and down
the scale, like a kettle simmering on the hob.  There opposite, among
the big boys, lay Faulkner, with the moonshine on his pale face, his
arms above his head, smirking even in his sleep.  And there was Parkin
just beyond, with the sheet half throttling him, as usual, sprawling
diagonally across his bed, and a bare foot sticking out at the end.  And
here lay--

Hullo!  My eyes opened and my teeth chattered faster.  Where _was_
Tempest?  His bed was next to Parkin's, but it was empty.  In the
moonlight and in the midst of my fright I could see his shirt and
waistcoat still dangling on the bed-post, while the coat and trousers
and slippers were gone.  The bed itself was tumbled, and had evidently
been lain in; but the sleeper had apparently risen hurriedly, partly
dressed himself, and gone out.

If only I could have got my tongue loose from the roof of the mouth to
which it was cleaving, I should have yelled aloud at this awful
discovery.  As it was I yelled silently.  For of all terrors upon earth,
sleep-walking was the one I dreaded the most.  Not that I had ever
walked myself, or, indeed, enjoyed the embarrassing friendship of any
one who did.  But I had read the books and knew all about it.  I would
sooner have faced a dozen ghosts than a somnambulist.

I had no doubt in my mind that the Dux's empty bed was to be accounted
for in this uncanny manner, and that the shot and yell were intimately
connected with his mysterious disappearance.  Now I thought of it, he
had not been himself for some time.  For a whole week he had not licked
me.  Ever since he had got his entrance scholarship at Low Heath he had
been queerer than ever.  He had not broken any rule of importance; he
had been on almost friendly terms with Faulkner; he had even ceased to
plot the assassination of Plummer.  He was evidently in a low state, and
suffering from unusual nervous excitement, thus violently to interrupt
the usual tenor of his way; and, as I knew, such a state lends itself
readily to the grisly practice of somnambulism.

What was to be done?  Yell?  I couldn't do it for the life of me.  Get
up and look for him?  Wild horses could not have dragged a toe of me out
of bed.  Stay where I was till the unearthly truant returned?  No, thank
you.  At the bare notion my rigid muscles relaxed, my erect hair lay
down, and I collapsed, a limp heap, on to the pillow, with every
available sheet and blanket drawn over my tightly closed eyes.

And yet, in my unimpassioned moments, I do not think I was a notorious
coward.  I had stood up to Faulkner's round-arms without pads, and
actually blocked one of them once, and that was more than some of the
fellows could say, I could take my header into the pool from the same
step as Parkin.  And once I had not run away from Hector when he broke
loose from his kennel.  Even now, but for the dim recollection of that
awful automatic machine, I might have pulled myself together
sufficiently to strike a light and jog my next-bed neighbour into
wakefulness.

But somehow my nerves had suffered a shock, and since there was no one
near to witness my poltroonery, and as, moreover, the night was chilly
enough to warrant reasonable precautions against cold, I preferred on
the whole to keep my head under the clothes, and drop for a season, so
to speak, below the surface of human affairs.

But existence below the sheets, when prolonged for several minutes, is
apt to pall upon a body, and in due time I had to face the problem
whether, after all, the vague terrors without were not preferable to the
certain asphyxia within.

I had put my nose cautiously outside for the purpose of considering the
point, when my eyes, thus uncovered, chanced to fasten on the door.

As they did so paralysis once more seized my frame; for, at that precise
moment, the door softly opened, and a figure, tall, pale, and familiar,
glided noiselessly into the dormitory.

It was Tempest.  He stood for a moment with the moonlight on him, and
glanced nervously round.  Then, apparently satisfied that slumber
reigned supreme, he stepped cautiously to his deserted couch.  My eyes
followed him as the eyes of the fascinated dove follow the serpent.  I
saw him divest himself of his semi-toilet, and then solemnly wind up his
watch, after which he slipped beneath the clothes, and all was silent.

I lay there, moving not a muscle, till the breathing of the truant grew
long and heavy, and finally settled down to the regular cadence of
sleep.  Then I breathed once more myself; my staring eyes gradually
drooped; my mind wandered over a large variety of topics, and finally
relapsed into the happy condition of thinking of nothing at all.

When I awoke next morning, in obedience to the summons of the bell, the
first thing I was aware of was that Tempest was complacently whistling a
popular air as he performed his toilet.

"Poor Dux!" thought I, "he little dreams what a terrible night he has
had.  Good morning, Dux," I said deferentially.

Tempest went on brushing his hair till he had finished his tune, and
then honoured me with a glance and a nod.

Something in my appearance must have attracted his attention, for he
looked at me again, and said, "What makes you look so jolly fishy, eh,
youngster?"

"Oh," said I, a little flattered to have my looks remarked upon, "I had
a nightmare or something."

"Comes of eating such a supper as you did," replied the Dux.

"Wouldn't he open his eyes," thought I, "if I told him what the
nightmare was!  But I won't do it."

I therefore relapsed into my toilet, and, as time was nearly up, left
the unconscious sleep-walker to finish his in silence.

Dr Plummer's "select young gentlemen" only numbered thirty, all told--
chiefly sons of the trading community, who received at the establishment
at Hampstead all the advantages of a good commercial education, combined
with some of the elegances of a high-class preparatory school.  Tipton's
father, who was an extensive draper in an adjoining suburb, was rather
fond, I believe, of telling his friends that he had a boy at Dangerfield
College.  It sounded well, especially when it was possible to add that
"my boy and his particular chum, young Tempest, son of the late Colonel
Tempest, you know, of the Guards, did this and that together, and might
perhaps spend their next holidays together at Tempest Hall, in
Lincolnshire, if he could spare the boy from home," and so on.

It was an awful fascination for some of us to speculate what the "Dux"
would have to say if he could hear this sort of talk.  We trembled for
Tipton's father, and his shop, and the whole neighbourhood in which he
flourished.

Tempest's presence at the "College" did, however, add quite a little
prestige to the place.  No one seemed to suppose that it had anything to
do with the fact that the terms were exceptionally moderate, and that
his gallant father had left very slender means behind him.  Even Dr
Plummer had a habit, so people said, of dragging his aristocratic head
pupil's name into his conversation with possible clients, while we boys
mingled a little awe with the esteem in which we held our broad-backed
and well-dressed comrade.

Within the last few weeks especially the school had had reason to be
proud of him.  He had taken an exhibition at Low Heath, one of the crack
public schools, and was going up there at Midsummer.  This was an event
in the annals of Plummer's which had never happened before and in all
probability would never happen again.

To do the Dux justice, he set no special store by himself.  He believed
in the Tempests as a race, but did not care a snap whether anybody else
believed in them or not.  Any boy who liked him he usually liked back,
and showed his affection, as he did in my case, by frequent lickings.
Boys he did not like he left severely alone, and there were a good many
such at Dangerfield.

As to the exhibition, that had been entirely his own idea.  He had not
said a word about it to Plummer or any of us, and it was not till after
he had got it, and Plummer in the fulness of his heart gave us a holiday
in celebration of the event, that we had any of us known that the Dux
had been in for it.

The second bell had already sounded before I had completed my toilet,
the finishing touches of which, consequently, I was left to add in
solitude.

When I descended to the refectory I was struck at once by an unusual air
of gloom and mystery about the place.  Something unpleasant must have
occurred, but what it was nobody appeared exactly to know, unless it was
the principal himself.  Dr Plummer was just about to make a
communication when I made my belated entry.

"Jones," said he, as much in sorrow as in anger, "this is not the first
time this term that you have been late."

It certainly was not.

"What is the reason?"

"Please, sir," said I, stammering out my stereotyped excuse, "I think I
can't have heard the first bell."

"Perhaps the first six sums of compound proportion written out ten times
will enable you to hear it more distinctly in future.  We will try it,
if you please, Jones."

Then turning sternly to the assembled school, he said, "I was about to
say something to you, boys, when this disturbance interrupted me.  A
shameful act has been done by some one in the night, in which I
sincerely hope no one here has had a hand.  The dog has been killed."

A whistle of consternation went round the room.  What?  Hector killed?--
Hector the collie--the beast--the brute--the sneak--the traitor--the
arch-enemy of every boy at Plummer's?  Hector, who was reported to be
worth thirty guineas?  Hector, the darling of Mrs P. and the young
P.'s?  Hector of the teeth, and the snarl, and the snap, the
incorruptible, the sleepless, the unforgiving?

What miscreant hero had dared perform this sacrilegious exploit?
"Perish Hector!" had been an immemorial war-cry at Plummer's; but Hector
had never yet perished.  No one had been found daring enough to bell the
cat--that is, to shoot the dog.  To what scoundrel was Dangerfield
College now indebted for this inestimable blessing?

Dead silence followed the doctor's announcement.  Boys' faces were
studies as they stood there rent in twain by delight at the news and
horror at the inevitable doom of the culprit.

"I repeat," said the head master, "Hector was found this morning shot in
his kennel.  Does any boy here know anything about it?"

Dead silence.  The master's eyes passed rapidly along the forms, but
returned evidently baffled.

"I trust I am to understand by your silence that none of you know
anything about it.  There is no doubt whatever that the guilty person
will be found.  I do not say that his name is known yet.  If he is in
this room,"--here he most unjustifiably fixed me with his eye--"he knows
as well as I do what will be the consequence to him.  Now go to
breakfast.  I shall have more to say about this matter presently."

If Dr Plummer had been anxious to save his tea and bread-and-butter
from too fierce an inroad he could hardly have selected a better method.
Dangerfield College was completely "off its feed" this morning.
Indeed, Ramsbottom, the usher, had almost to bully the victuals down the
boys' throats in order to get the meal over.  The only boy who made any
pretence to an appetite was the Dux, who ate steadily, much to my
amazement, in the intervals of the conversation.

"It's a bit of a go, ain't it?" observed Dicky Brown, who, despite his
educational advantages, could never quite master the politest form of
his native tongue.

"Rather," said I--"awkward for somebody."

Then, as my eyes fell once more on Tempest, complacently cutting another
slice off the loaf, an idea occurred to me.

"You know, Dicky," said I, feeling that I was walking on thin ice, "I
almost fancied I heard a sound of a gun in the night."

Dicky laughed.

"Trust you for knowing all about a thing after it's happened.  It would
have been a rum thing if you hadn't."

This was unfeeling of Dicky.  I am sure I have never pretended to know
as much about anything as he did.

"Oh, but I really did--a shot, and a yell too," said I.

"Go it, you're getting on," said Dicky.  "You can pile it up, Tom.  Why
don't you say you saw me do it while you are about it?"

"Because I didn't."

"All I can say," said the Dux, buttering his bread liberally, "I'm
precious glad the beast is off the hooks.  I always hated him.  Which of
you kids did it?"

We both promptly replied that he was quite under a wrong impression.  We
were pained by the very suggestion.

"All right," said he, laughing in his reckless way, and talking quite
loud enough for Plummer to hear him if he happened to come in, "you've
less to be proud of than I fancied.  If you didn't do it, who did, eh?"

That was the question which was puzzling every one, except perhaps
myself, who was undergoing a most uncomfortable mental argument as I
slowly recalled the events of last night.

"Give it up; ask another," said Faulkner.  "I'm precious glad I've not
got a pistol."  Here the Dux coloured a little, and relapsed into
silence.  He disliked Faulkner, and objected to his cutting into the
conversation.

"One comfort," said I, endeavouring to change the topic: "we may get off
that brutal Latin exercise if Plummer takes on hard about this affair."

"Poor old Hector!" said Dicky.  "If that's so, we shall owe him one good
turn at least--eh, old Compound Proportion?"

This pointed allusion to my misfortunes disinclined me to hold further
conversation with Richard Brown, and the meal ended in general silence.

As we trooped back to the schoolroom I overheard Faulkner say to another
of the seniors--

"I say, did you see the way Tempest flared up when I said that about the
pistol just now?  Rather awkward for him, I fancy, if he's got one."

"What's the odds if he didn't shoot the dog?" was the philosophical
reply.

For all that, I had observed the Dux's confusion, and the sight of it
made me very uncomfortable on his account.  Faulkner was right.  It
would be precious awkward for any one who might be discovered to possess
a pistol.  The fact that firearms were expressly forbidden at
Dangerfield College was itself, I am sorry to say, a strong presumption
in favour of Tempest having one.  Besides, I had myself once heard him
speak about shooting rooks at home with a pistol.

Oddly enough, chance was to put in my way a means of setting my mind at
rest almost immediately.

"I say, kid," said the Dux, as I entered the schoolroom just before the
time, "I've left my Latin grammar in my locker upstairs.  Look sharp, or
you'll be late again and catch it."

That was his style all over--insult and injury hand in hand.  He only
practised it on fellows he really liked, too.

"I say, I can't," pleaded I.  "Plummer will give it me hot if he catches
me again.  I've got it pretty bad as it is."

"I know you have; that's why I tell you to look sharp."  It was no good
arguing with Tempest.  I knew he would risk his neck for me any day.
That would be much less exertion to him than running upstairs.  So I
went.

The Dux's locker, I grieve to say, was a model of untidiness.  Cricket
flannels, eatables, letters, tooth-powders, books, and keepsakes were
all huddled together in admired disorder to the full extent of the
capacity of the box.  The books being well in the rear of the heap, and
time being precious, I availed myself of the rough-and-ready method of
emptying out the entire contents at one fell swoop and extracting the
particular object of my quest from the _debris_.

I had done so, and was proceeding to huddle up the other things into a
compact block of a size to fit once more into the receptacle, when
something fell from the pocket of one of the garments with a clatter to
the floor.  It was a pistol!

With a face as white and teeth as chattering as if I had seen a ghost, I
instinctively pounced upon the tell-tale weapon, and whisked it, with a
shudder, into my own pocket.  Then, with decidedly impaired energy, I
punched the bundle back into its place, slammed down the lid, and
returned to the schoolroom just in time to regain my place before Dr
Plummer made his entry.

"You'll give yourself heart-disease if you rush up and down stairs like
that," said Tempest as I handed him the book.  "You look fishier than
ever."

"Latin grammar, juniors," announced the doctor.  "Close books.  Jones,
stand up and decline _gradus_."

I declined, and fell.  The excitements of the past six hours had
demoralised me altogether.  I could not remember who or what _gradus_
was--whether it was an active noun or a feminine verb or a plural
conjunction, or what.  In vain the faithful Dicky prompted me from
behind and Graham minor from the side.  As they both prompted at the
same time, and each suggested different things, I only floundered
deeper.  I felt myself smiling vacantly first at one, then at the other,
then at the doctor.  I moved one hand feebly behind me in token of my
despairing gratitude to Dicky, and the other I laid convulsively on the
collar of Graham's coat.  It was all of no avail, and finally, when I
had almost reached the stage of laughing aloud, my mother wit came to my
rescue and I sat down.

This was the beginning of a tragedy of errors.  With the ghost of Hector
haunting us, none of us, except the Dux, who always kept his head, could
do anything.  The doctor's favours were lavishly and impartially
distributed.  Watkins, the "baby" of the class, made an ingenious
calculation that if all the "lines" which were doled out as the result
of that morning's work were to be extended in one unbroken length, they
would reach exactly from Plummer's desk to the late Hector's kennel.
Hector again!  Every one's thoughts veered round to the unlucky
quadruped and the storm that was brewing over his mangled remains.

Morning school passed, however, without any further official
announcement on the subject.  When class was dismissed half an hour
earlier than usual, it was tacitly understood that this was in
consequence of the obsequies of the late lamented, which were attended
by the Plummer family and the errand boy, not indeed in crape, but amid
every sign of mourning.

We young gentlemen were not invited.  Had we been, it is doubtful
whether the alacrity with which some of us would have obeyed the summons
would have been altogether complimentary to the memory of the deceased.

As it was, we loafed about dismally, discussing the topic of the hour in
corners, and wished the storm would break and be done with.

We had not long to wait!



CHAPTER TWO.

A CONSPIRACY OF SILENCE.

As for me, I was very poor company for any one that afternoon of
Hector's funeral.  Something was burning a hole in my pocket, and I felt
myself in a most uncomfortable fix.

"It's all up with old Dux," said I to myself, "if it's found out.  But
suppose it's found on me?  Still more precious awkward.  I'd either have
to lump it or let out.  Don't see much fun in either myself.  Seems to
me the sooner I get rid of the beastly thing the better.  Fancy his
letting it lie about in his locker!  He'd give me a hiding for
interfering, I know, if he only knew.  But I wouldn't for anything he
got lagged.  Old Dux is one of those chaps that has to be backed up
against himself.  Sha'n't be my fault if he isn't."

The reader will have judged by this time that I belonged to the species
prig in my youthful days.  Let that pass; I was not a unique specimen.

Full of my noble resolve of saving the Dux from himself, I went out to
take the air, and strolled aimlessly in the direction of the pond.  A
professional burglar could not have ordered his footsteps more
circumspectly.  I perambulated the pool, whistling a cheerful tune, and
looking attentively at the rooks overhead.  Not a soul was in sight.  I
began to throw stones into the water, small to begin with, then larger,
then bits of stick about six inches long.  Then I smuggled the unlucky
pistol out of my pocket in my handkerchief, and whistled still more
cheerfully.  Although no one was looking, it seemed prudent to adopt an
air of general boredom, as if I was tired of throwing sticks into the
pond.  I would only throw one more.  Even that was a fag, but I would do
it.

What a plump, noisy splash it made, sending out circles far and near,
and gurgling in a sickening way as it sank in a very unsticklike fashion
to the bottom.

My whistling ceased, my air of dejection increased.  I must be
unsociable no longer.  Let me rejoin my dear schoolfellows, making a
little _detour_ in order to appear to reach them from the direction not
of the pond but of the orchard.

I was sheering off by the lower end of the pond, when, to my horror, I
perceived a boy groping on the grass on all fours, apparently digging up
the ground with a trowel.

On closer inspection I found that it was Dicky.

"Oh, it's you, is it?" said he, as I came upon him.  "Have you done
chucking things into the pond?"

"Why," said I, taken aback; "why, Dicky, what on earth are you up to?"

"Never mind--an experiment, that's all.  I'm glad it's only you.  I was
afraid it was some one else.  You must be jolly hard up for a bit of fun
to come and chuck things into the pond."

"Oh!" said I, with tell-tale embarrassment, "I just strolled down for
the walk.  I didn't know you'd taken to gardening."

"There goes the bell," said Dicky.  "Cut up.  I'll be there as soon as
you."

I obeyed, mystified and uncomfortable.  Suppose Dicky had seen the
pistol!  I found the fellows hanging about the school door waiting to go
in.

"Been to the funeral, kid?" said the Dux, as I approached.  I wished he
would speak more quietly on such dangerous topics when Plummer was
within earshot.

"No, I've been a stroll," said I.  "It's rather hot walking."

"I guess it will be hotter before long," said some one.  "Plummer looks
as if he means to have it out this afternoon."

"I hope he won't go asking any awkward questions," said Dicky, who had
by this time joined us.

"What's the odds, if you didn't do it?" demanded the Dux.

"Look out," said Faulkner; "here he comes.  He's beckoning us in."

"Now we're in for it!" thought we all.

Plummer evidently meant business this time.  The melancholy ceremony at
which he had just assisted had kindled the fires within him, and he sat
at his desk glowering as each boy dropped into his place, with the air
of a wolf selecting his victim.

As I encountered that awful eye, I found myself secretly wondering
whether by any chance I might have shot the dog in a fit of absence of
mind.  Brown, I think, was troubled by a similar misgiving.  Some of the
seniors evidently resented the way in which the head master glared at
them, and tried to glare back.  Faulkner assumed an air of real
affliction, presumably for the departed.  Tempest, on the other hand,
drummed his fingers indifferently on the desk, and looked more than
usually bored by the whole business.

"Now, boys," began Plummer, in the short sharp tones he used to affect
when he was wont to administer justice; "about Hector."

Ah! that fatal name again!  It administered a nervous shock all round,
and the dead silence which ensued showed that every boy present was
alive to the critical nature of the situation.

"I have already told you what has occurred, and have asked if any one
here knows anything about the matter," said the doctor.  "I repeat the
question.  If any of you know anything, let there be no hesitation in
speaking up."

No reply.  Boys looked straight in front of them and held their breaths.

"Very well," said the doctor, his voice becoming harder and sterner, "I
am to understand no boy here is able to throw any light on the mystery.
Is that so?"

If silence gives consent, no question was ever more emphatically
answered in the affirmative.

"I hoped it would be unnecessary to ask the question twice," said Dr
Plummer.  "I decline to accept silence as an answer.  Let the head boy
come forward."

Tempest left his place and advanced to the desk.

"Tempest, do you know anything of this matter?"

"No, sir," said Tempest.

I felt the skin on the top of my head grow tight, and my breath catch in
my throat.  Never had I known the Dux to tell a lie to any one.  What was
I to do when my turn came?

"Go to your seat.  The next boy come forward."

Parkin obeyed, and answered the question with a clear negative.

"The next boy."

The next boy was Faulkner, who I suspected would fain have been able to
say he knew anything.  But for once he was at fault, and had to reply
with an apologetic "No."

In due time it was Dicky's turn.

"Do you know anything of the matter, Brown?"

"No, sir," said Brown, almost noisily.

The doctor looked at him keenly, and then ordered him to his place.

"Jones, come forward."

I felt the blood fly out of my cheeks and my heart jump to my mouth as I
obeyed.  As I passed up the room I glanced nervously at the Dux where he
sat listlessly regarding the scene.  But he took no notice of me.

"Jones," said the doctor, "do you known anything of this matter?"

The words would not come; and I glanced around again for succour.

"Turn your face to me, sir," thundered the doctor, "and answer my
question."

What could I say?  Where could I look?  The question was repeated once
more.

"I only know I fancy I heard a shot in the night."  I stammered at last.

A flutter of interest went round the room.  Failing all other clues it
evidently seemed to be something to most of those present to elicit even
this.

"Why did you not say so when you were asked this morning?"

No answer.

"Do you hear me, sir?"

"Please, sir, I couldn't be sure I had not been dreaming."

"When did you hear this sound?"

"I don't know what time, sir; I had been asleep."

"Was it light or dark?"

"Dark."

"Is that all you heard?"

"I thought I heard a yell, too."

"Did you get up or wake any of the others?"

"No, sir."

"Did you do nothing at all?"

"I was frightened, sir, and hid under the clothes."

"Is that all?"

Wasn't it about enough?  I thought.

"Yes, sir."

I staggered back to my seat like a wounded man after a fray.  I knew I
had lost caste with the fellows; I had seriously compromised myself with
the head master.  At least, I told myself, I had escaped the desperate
fate of saying anything against the Dux.  For the sake of that, I could
afford to put up with the other two consequences.

The grand inquest came to an end.  One candid youth admitted that all he
knew of the matter was that he was very glad Hector was dead, and for
this impious irrelevance he was ordered to write an appalling imposition
and forfeit several half-holidays.  But that, for the time being, was
the worst thunderbolt that fell from the doctor's armoury.

The Dux was kindly waiting for me outside.  If he was grateful to me he
concealed his feelings wonderfully; for he seized me by the coat collar
and invited me to step with him to a quiet retreat where he administered
the soundest thrashing I had had that term without interruption.

Explanation, I knew, would be of no avail.  Tempest made a point of
always postponing an explanation till after the deed was done.

When at length I gathered myself together, and inquired as pleasantly as
I could to what special circumstances I was indebted for this painful
incident, he replied--

"For being an idiot and a sneak.  Get away, or I'll kick you."

Brown, whom I presently encountered, put the matter rather more
precisely.

"Well," said he, "you told about as much as you could.  How sorry you
must have been not to tell more!"

"Don't, Dicky;" said I; "I--I--"

"You're almost as big an ass as you look," said Dicky, "and that's
saying something.  Come and see my experiment."

I was not in a scientific mood, but anything was welcome to change the
subject.  So I took Dicky's arm and went.

Dicky was a queer boy.  He was of an inventive turn of mind, and given
up to science.  His experiments rarely succeeded, and when they did they
almost invariably landed him in disgrace.  Still he persevered and hoped
some day to make a hit.

He explained to me, as we walked down the garden, that he had lately
been taking an interest in the pond.

It was all I could do to appear only moderately interested in this
announcement.  Had not I an interest in the pond too?  What followed was
even more uncomfortable.

"You know Lesseps and all those chaps?" said he.

"He left before I came, I think," said I.

Dicky laughed unfeelingly.

"I mean the chap who cut the Suez Canal," said he.

"Oh!  I beg your pardon," said I.  "No, I don't know him."

"Well, I've been having a go in at the same kind of job," continued
Dicky.  "You know what a drop there is at the end of the pond, where you
saw me yesterday, in the shrubbery?  Well, it struck me it wouldn't take
much engineering to empty it."

"What!"  I exclaimed, "empty the pond!  You'll get in an awful row,
Dicky.  Don't think of it."

"Think--it's done, I tell you," said the man of science.  "That was what
I was at when you saw me."

"I thought you were digging up primroses."

"Digging up grandmothers!  I was letting in a pipe to drain it.  It was
a rare job to shove it in from the bottom corner of the pond through the
bank into the shrubbery.  But I managed it.  It was coming through like
one o'clock when I left.  I expect the pond will be empty by this time."

I quailed with horror.  If so, I should be discovered.  I was tempted to
turn tail: but that would be even worse.  The only thing was to stay and
see it through.

I confronted myself with the reflection that Dicky's experiments so
rarely succeeded, that in all probability the pistol still lay safe
under four feet of water.  If not--

"Hooray!" exclaimed Dicky, as we came in sight of the place; "it's done
the trick this time.  See, Tom!"

I did see.  In place of the water I left there in the morning was a
large empty basin of mud, with a few large puddles of water lying at the
bottom, and a few hillocks of mud denoting the places which had once
been shallows.

My quick eye hurriedly took in the dismal landscape.  For a moment my
spirits rose, for I could nowhere discern the compromising object I
dreaded to see.  It was no doubt buried in the mud, and as safe as if
the pond were full to the brim.

"Isn't it ripping?" said Dicky.  "It wasn't easy to do, but it only
wanted a little management.  I mean to go in for engineer-- Hullo,
what's that rummy stone out there? or is it a stone, or a fish, or-- I
say, Tom," he added, clutching my arm, "I'm bothered if that's not a
pistol!"

My white face and chattering teeth made reply unnecessary.  There,
snugly perched on a little heap of stones, as if set up for inspection,
lay the unlucky pistol, gleaming in the afternoon sun.

Dicky looked first at the pistol, then at me; and began slowly to take
in the state of affairs.

He took a cautious step out in the mud in the direction of the weapon,
but came back.

"I thought you could hardly be chucking in all those things for fun,"
said he presently.

I stood gaping in an imbecile way, and said nothing.

"I know whose it is.  He had it up here once before."

"I say," gulped I, "can't you let the water in again?"  Dick had not
considered this.  His triumph had been letting the water out.  However,
he would see what could be done.

We went down into the shrubbery.  About a foot of water lay on the
ground, promising great fertility some day, but decidedly muddy-looking
to-day.

"The thing will be to bung up the hole first," said Dicky.

So we set to work to hammer up the end of the zinc pipe and stuff the
aperture round with sods and stones.  I even sacrificed my cap to the
good cause.

The bell began to ring before we had well completed the task.  "That
ought to keep any more from running out," said Dicky.  "If we're lucky,
the water will come in on its own hook at the other end."

The theory was not exactly scientific, for scientific men do not believe
in luck.  Still, it was the best we could think of as we turned to go.

"Stop a bit," said I, as we were leaving.  "May as well tidy up a bit in
there before we go, eh?"

"In there" was the bed of the pond.

"It might look better," said Dick, turning up his trousers.  We decently
interred the pistol in the mud, and raised a small heap of stones to
keep it down; and then cautiously obliterating our footsteps in the mud,
we made for _terra firma_, and scuttled back to school as fast as our
legs would carry us.

Fortunately we entered unobserved, and disencumbered ourselves of our
muddy boots without attracting attention to their condition.  Ten
minutes later we were deep in our work in the big schoolroom.

Preparation that night was a solemn and gloomy ceremony.  Dicky and I
kept catching one another's eyes, and then glancing on to where the Dux,
cool as a cucumber, sat turning over the leaves of his lexicon.

"He's got a cheek of his own, has Dux," said I to myself.

"If I didn't know it was him," signalled the ungrammatical Dicky across
the room, "I should never have believed it."

"You may make as many faces as you like at young Brown," glared Tempest
at me, "but if I catch you making any more at me, your mother will need
some extra pocket-handkerchiefs."

"Jones," observed Dr Plummer aloud, "a double _poena_ for aggravated
inattention."

All right.  I was getting pretty full up with engagements for one day,
and began to think bed-time would be rather a relief.

It came at last.  In the dormitory Ramsbottom successfully interfered
with conversation by patrolling the chamber until the boys were asleep.
No one doubted that he had been set to the task by the head master, and
it augured rather badly for the resumption of the inquest next day.

However, even patrols go to sleep sometimes, and when I woke early next
morning the usher had vanished to his own chamber.  My first thought was
not Hector, or the doctor, or my _poenas_, or the Dux, but the pond.

How, I wondered, was it getting on?

I routed up Dicky, and very quietly we dressed and slipped out.  I knew
that my early rising, if it were discovered, would probably be set down
to my zeal for discharging impositions.  But even they must wait now
till we were sure about the pond.

For Dicky and I stood liable to as big a row as the assassin of Hector
himself if anything went wrong with our experiment in engineering.
Luckily very few fellows haunted this particularly muddy corner of the
grounds, and now that Hector was above a daily bath, there was little
chance of Plummer himself discovering the remarkably low tide on his
premises--still less of his poking about among the stones in the bed of
the pool.

To our great relief we found that our dam at the foot was holding out
bravely, and that comparatively little water was trickling through the
bank into the shrubbery.  The flow at the upper end, however, was
distressingly small, and though a whole night had passed we could still
see the heap of stones under which the pistol was buried rising up from
the shallow puddles around it, inviting investigation.

With astounding industry we worked away that morning, widening and
deepening the little channel along which the rivulet made its way to the
pond.  And before we had done we had the satisfaction of seeing a fairly
brisk inflow.  We would fain have waited to see the fatal little island
disappear below the surface.  But the first bell was already an sounding
when the water completed the circle, leaving it standing up more
prominent than ever.

To our horror, at this precise moment Tempest strolled down.

"Hullo! what are you two after?  Fishing?  One way to catch them,
letting all the water out."

"It was an experiment," said Dicky, who, like myself, was very pale as
he looked first at the Dux, then at the guilty hillock in the pond.

"So it seems.  In other words, you're making a jolly mess, and are
enjoying yourselves.  I hope you'll enjoy it equally, both of you, when
Plummer sees what you've done."

"Shall you tell him?"  I asked, somewhat breathlessly.  The Dux laughed
scornfully.

"You deserve a hiding for asking such a thing.  Come here!  Jump out on
to that little island there, and stay there till I tell you."

"Oh, Dux, please not," said I, in a tone of terror, which was quite out
of proportion to the penalty.  The pistol was only two inches below the
surface!

"Do you hear?  Look sharp, or I'll chuck you there."

That might be worse.  It might hurt me and cut up the soil.  So I jumped
gingerly out, and stood poised with a foot in the water on either side,
dreading at any moment to see the stones slip and the tell-tale gleam of
the buried weapon.

"If you don't stand properly," said the Dux, "I'll make you sit down.
Come along, young Brown, it's time we went up to school."

"How long am I to stay, please?"  I inquired.

"Till you're in water up to the knees," said the Dux, as he turned away,
with the faithless Dicky beside him.

Up to the knees!  I stood loyally for five minutes, during which the
water gained about an eighth of an inch up my ankles.  Then the second
bell rang, and things became desperate.

Accordingly I knelt in the water until I could confidently assert that I
was wet, very wet indeed, up to the knees; which done, I posted as fast
as my ill-used legs would carry me to morning school.



CHAPTER THREE.

"WHEN SHALL WE THREE MEET AGAIN?"

Once more Dr Plummer reserved himself for the afternoon.  Perhaps it
was the haunting tyranny of the defunct Hector; perhaps it was pique at
being baffled, so far, in finding the culprit; whatever may have been
the reason, he was in an ominously uncompromising mood when at last he
returned to the fateful question.

"Come up, the first boy," said he abruptly.

The Dux was evidently getting tired of all this business (and no wonder,
it seemed to me), and obeyed the summons not in the best of humours.

"Tempest," said the doctor, "I repeat my question of yesterday.  Do you
know anything whatever of this matter?"

"No, sir--I said so," replied the Dux, in a clear voice.

Dr Plummer scowled somewhat at this tart reply.  He rather liked his
head boy, and was not prepared to find him, of all others, recalcitrant.

"I do not ask what you said, sir; I ask what you say," said he.

"I said No.  I'm not a liar," replied the Dux rather fiercely.

The doctor received this rather more meekly than most of us expected,
and proceeded with his next question.

"Have you the slightest reason to suspect any one of having done it, or
of knowing anything about it?"

Tempest remained silent, with flushed and angry face.

"Do you hear me, sir?" asked the doctor, now thoroughly roused.

"Yes, sir."

"Then why don't you answer at once?"

"I would not answer the question if I could," said the Dux defiantly.

Dr Plummer stared at the boy as if he had been a wild beast.

"How dare you say such a thing to me?" he demanded.  "You heard my
question.  Have you the slightest grounds for suspecting any one?"

The Dux bit his lips and remained silent.

"Do you hear, Tempest?"

No reply.

"Go to your seat, sir.  I will speak to you presently."

Tempest obeyed, with head erect and a red spot on either cheek.

We gazed at him in amazement.  We had always given him credit for
hardihood, but we had never believed him capable of mutiny of this kind;
especially--

"Seems to me," whispered Dicky, "he might as well tell right away.
He'll get expelled either way.  Anyhow--"

"Brown, come forward."

Dicky started as if he had been detected in the act of holding a pistol
to Hector's head.  He was not in the least prepared to be summoned thus
out of his turn; and morally he went to pieces as he rose to obey.

"Mum's the word!" whispered I, encouragingly, as he started for the
front.

The doctor was on the alert with a vengeance to-day!

"Jones, come forward too," said he.

It was my turn to jump now.

"Now, sir, what was that you said to Brown just now?"

My back went up instinctively at his tone.

"I said, 'Mum's the word,'" I replied as doggedly as I could.

The doctor changed colour.  This was getting serious.  He had no
precedents for such a case at Dangerfield, and for a moment was
evidently at a loss how to proceed.

Perhaps he regretted for once in a way the policy of believing a boy
guilty till he can prove himself innocent.  Whether he did or no, it was
too late to surrender it now.

"Go to your seat, Jones; I shall deal with you presently."

I marched off, with all the blood of the Joneses tingling in my veins.
The ingenuous Dicky was left to his ordeal single-handed.

"Now, Brown," said the doctor, "you have heard the question, to which I
mean to have an answer--and I caution you before I repeat it, to be
careful--I shall know what interpretation to put on any attempt to
prevaricate.  Tell me, Brown, do you know anything at all of this
matter, or have you grounds for suspecting any one of being concerned in
it?"

Dicky shut his mouth with a snap, and looked as if he wished devoutly
some one could turn a key on it and keep it so.

"Speak, sir," said the doctor, coming down from his desk.

By one of those strange freaks of perversity which are so hard to
account for, Dicky's spirits went up higher every moment, and when the
doctor stood over him and repeated the question a third time, he almost,
I believe, enjoyed himself.  He had never imagined courage was so easy.

To his surprise Dr Plummer did not strike, but returned quietly to his
desk.

"Brown," said he, "you may go.  Tell the housekeeper to pack your box in
time for the early train to-morrow."

"What!" exclaimed poor old Dick, fairly electrified into speech; "am I
expelled, sir?"

"You will be unless you speak at once.  I give you a last chance."

Dicky looked up at the doctor, then down at the floor.  I knew the
struggle in his mind: the thought of his people at home, of the disgrace
of being expelled, of the suspicions he would leave behind.  Then I
could see him steal a doubtful glance at the Dux and at me, and then
pass his eye along the rows of faces eagerly waiting for his decision.

Then he held up his head, and I knew dear old Dicky was as sound as a
bell.  No one had the right to make him turn sneak--and no one should do
it!  "I'll go and pack," said he quietly, and turned to the door.

Neither the Dux nor I saw the last of poor Dicky Brown at Dangerfield.
We were otherwise engaged when he departed home in a four-wheeled cab in
charge of Mr Ramsbottom that evening.  We were, in point of fact, in
durance vile ourselves, with every prospect of speedily requiring the
services of two more four-wheeled cabmen on our own accounts.

The Dux's fury at Dicky's summary expulsion had been quite a surprise
even to me.

"It's a shame," he had shouted as the door closed; "a caddish shame!"

"Who said that?" asked Dr Plummer.

"I did.  I say it's a caddish shame!"

"So do I!" yelled I at the top of my voice, and quite carried away by
the occasion.

This was getting very embarrassing for Plummer.  Perhaps he behaved in
the best way open to him under the circumstances.  He ignored us both,
and proceeded to call up Faulkner to answer his precious questions.

Much depended on Faulkner then.  If he had refused to answer, as the Dux
had done, and Brown had done, and others were prepared to do, Plummer
might have seen that his case was hopeless, and have given it up.
Faulkner was nothing like such a favourite with the head master as
Tempest, nor had he such a following among the boys.  Still, he led his
party, and if he chose now to leave us in the lurch Plummer was saved
and we were lost.

"I know nothing of the matter, sir," said Faulkner, "and I have no
reason at all to suspect any one."

It sounded a simple answer, but it was rank treason.  For it was as good
as saying Plummer had a right to ask these questions, and that he,
Faulkner, would inform if he only knew who the culprit was.

After that it was evident the game, the Dux's game and mine, was up.
Boy after boy was called up and interrogated, and one by one they
followed Faulkner in his submission.  A few--like Graham junior--
attempted to hold out, but broke down under pressure.  A few feebly
compromised by explaining that had they known the culprit they would not
have answered; but as they did not they saw no reason for not saying so.

"It comes to this, then," said the doctor: "that out of the entire
school, three boys, and three only, are silent.  The only conclusion I
can draw from their conduct is that they dare not deny that they know
something of this shameful outrage.  Tempest, you are the head boy.  I
have always looked on you as a credit to the school, and a good example
to your youngers.  You see your present behaviour involves trouble to
others than yourself.  I do not wish to be hasty in this matter, and am
willing to give you one more opportunity of answering my question.  Do
you know anything of this affair, or have you any grounds for suspecting
any one of being connected with it?"

The Dux flushed with indignation, glared straight at the head master by
way of reply, and closed his lips.

"Very well, sir.  Jones, I now repeat the question to you.  You are a
little boy, and there is more excuse for you, as you were led astray by
the bad example of a senior.  I caution you now to do as the others have
done, and give me a plain answer to a plain question.  Otherwise you
must take the consequences."

I am afraid I blushed and looked far less determined than I would have
liked.  But I did my best to glare back and tighten my lips like the
Dux.

"Very well.  Tempest and Jones, go to my study and remain there till I
come."

We had not long to wait for our doom.  The doctor was in the study
almost as soon as we.

We stood there while he wrote some letters and put away some books on
the shelves.  Then he rang the bell, and handed the letters to the
servant to post.  After that he sat in his chair for a quarter of an
hour in silence, evidently ruminating.

At last he deigned to notice our presence.

"Tempest," he said, "I am very grieved at this.  I had hoped better
things of you.  You know what the consequence must be to you?"

"I'm to be expelled, I know," said the Dux.  "The sooner the better."

The doctor raised his eyebrows.  There was no dealing with a reprobate
like this.

"I have written to your grandfather to say you will return home to-
morrow."

"I'm sorry it's not to-night," said the Dux.

"And you, Jones," said the doctor to me, not heeding the last
speech,--"I am more sorry for you.  You are a foolish, misguided boy.
Even now, if you atone for your fault by replying to my questions, I am
willing to spare your mother the misery you seem bent on bringing upon
her."

This was a cruel thrust.  The thought of my mother had crossed my mind
once or twice already, and almost brought the tears to my eyes.  It
would be hard to explain all to her--and yet, and yet, anything was
better than turning sneak.

"I won't answer," said I.  "I'd sooner be expelled."

"Your desire shall be gratified," said the doctor drily; "to-morrow you
will go too."

"Thank you, sir."

"Tempest, you will remain here for the rest of the day--Jones, you will
go to the dormitory and remain there.  I forbid you, either of you, to
hold any communication with your late schoolfellows while you remain
here."

Next morning after breakfast we were finally brought up before the whole
school and harangued publicly by the head master.  Our punishment, he
told us, we had deliberately brought on our own heads.  Aggravated
insubordination like ours was not to be tolerated in any school.  He was
sure we should soon regret and be ashamed of our conduct, if we were not
so already.  For his own part he would try to forget the unfortunate
affair, and to think kindly of us both.  Mr Ramsbottom would see
Tempest to the station, and the matron would escort me.

"Good-bye, Tempest," said he, holding out his hand.

"Good-bye," said the Dux, not heeding the hand, and walking to the door.

"Good-bye, Jones."

I shook hands.  After all, Plummer, I thought, meant to be kind, though
he took an odd way of showing it.  I was thankful when the ceremony was
over, and the Dux and I found ourselves with our luggage in the hall
waiting for our cabs.

All at once the old school we were leaving seemed to become dearer than
I had thought.

The hall where we stood was full of the memory of jolly comings and
goings.  The field out there seemed to echo with the whizzing of balls
and the war-whoops of combatants.  The very schoolroom we had just left,
from which even now came the hum of work in which we were no more to
join, had its pleasant associations of battles fought, friends gained,
difficulties mastered.  How I would have liked to run down to get a last
look at the pond, or upstairs for a farewell glance round the dormitory!
But now we were out of it--Dux and I.  The place belonged to us no
more.  We were outsiders, visitors whose time was up, and whose cabs
were due at the front door at any moment.

And what was it all for?

"If it hadn't been for that beast Hector," said the Dux rather dismally,
"we shouldn't have been out here, Tommy."

He rarely called me by my Christian name.  It was always a sign he was
out of sorts.

"I do wish you'd missed him," said I.

"Missed him!  What on earth do you mean?"

"Not made such a good shot--that's what I mean."

"Shot!  Young Brown, are you crazy?"

"Most likely," said I, beginning to get hot and cold at the same time.
"Why, do you mean to say you didn't, then?"

"Didn't what?"

"Shoot him."

"Shoot him?  Me shoot?  I no more shot the beast than you did."

The perspiration started to my forehead.

"But the pistol.  Dux?"

"What pistol?"

"The one I found in your locker, when I went to get your book, you
know."

"That thing?  It's been there all the term.  It hasn't even got a
trigger!"

"It's not there now.  It's at the bottom of the pond."

The Dux looked at me as if he were about to eat me up, I looked back as
if I were ready for it.

"You didn't shoot Hector, then?"  I faltered.

"What do you take me for, you young ass?  Of course not."

"Then Brown and I have both--"

"Brown?  What about him?  He didn't think I'd done it?"

"He wouldn't have been expelled if he hadn't."

The Dux gave a whistle of mingled dismay and fury.

"You know," said I, "I saw you come in that night, just after I'd heard
the shot, and made sure--"

"Oh, you--you beauty!" cried the Dux, with a bitter laugh.  "Why, I'd
just gone down for my watch, which I'd left in my blazer, so as to wind
it up--and you--you actually go and set me down as a murderer!"

"Oh, Dux, I'm so awfully sorry!  Let me go and tell Plummer."

"If you do, I'll wring your neck.  I wouldn't stay in this hole another
day if he came on his knees and asked me.  What right has he to want to
make sneaks of us?  Do you mean to say you and young Brown thought all
along I had done it, and that I was telling lies when I said I didn't?"

"I thought perhaps you'd done it in your sleep, and didn't know."

He laughed scornfully.

"That's why you two were mum?" asked he.  "Didn't want to let out on
me?"

"Well, yes, partly.  I'm awfully sorry, Dux.  Will you ever forgive me?"

"Forgive you, kid!  If I'd time I'd thrash you within an inch of your
life for being such a fool, and then I'd thank you for being such a
trump--you and Brown too."

"Is it too late to do anything now?" asked I again.

"Not for me--nothing would keep me here.  But I don't see why you should
be expelled.  I'll tell Plummer it was a mistake."

"No, you won't," said I, catching his arm.  "I wouldn't stay here now
for worlds."

"It's rough all round," said Tempest, looking profoundly miserable, as
the rumble of a cab came up to the hall door.

"What will your mater say, kid?"

"She'll understand.  I hope she won't send me back though."

"Get her to send you to Low Heath."

"She couldn't afford it.  You'll write to me, Dux?"

"Most likely.  Tell Brown how sorry I am."

"Now, Tempest, ready?" said Mr Ramsbottom.

"Good-bye, kid.  I sha'n't forget you."

Next minute he was off, and I was left alone.

I do not deny that for a moment or two I found it convenient to rub my
eyes.  It was a hot day, and the light through the window was dazzling,
I think.

Then to my relief up came my cab, and under the stalwart escort of Mrs
Potts, the matron, I quitted Dangerfield for good.

My journey home was, as may be imagined, not a festive one.  What would
my mother say, or my guardian?  What version of the story had Plummer
given them?  It consoled me to work myself up into a fury as I sat in
the corner of the railway carriage, and prepare an indictment of his
conduct which should make my conduct appear not only justifiable, but
heroic.

Alas! heroism can rarely endure the rattle of a long railway journey.
Long before we reached Fallowfield my heart was in my boots, and my
fierceness had all evaporated.

But a year ago my father had died, leaving me, his only child, to be the
comfort and support of my mother.  What message of comfort or support
was I carrying home to-day?  What would my guardian, who had given me
such yards of stern advice about honouring my betters, say when he
heard?  Should I be sent to an office to run errands, or passed on to a
school for troublesome boys, or left to knock about with no one to care
what became of me?

With such pleasant misgivings in my mind I reached Fallowfield, and
braced myself up for the interview before me.



CHAPTER FOUR.

BRUSHING-UP THE CLASSICS.

My guardian, I am bound to say, disappointed me.  I had rather hoped, as
I travelled home, that I would be able to put my conduct before him in
such a way that he would think me rather a fine young fellow, and
consider himself honoured in being my guardian.  That my mother would
take on, I felt sure.

"Women," said I to myself--I was thirteen, and therefore was supposed to
know what women thought about things--"women can't see below the surface
of things.  But old Girdler was a boy himself once, and knows what it is
for a fellow to get into a row for being a brick."

My sage prognostications were falsified doubly.  My mother, though she
wept to see me come home in this style, did me justice at once.  To
think I could ever have doubted her!

"Of course, sonny dear," said she, kissing me, "it was very hard.
Still, I am sure it would have been a shabby thing to tell tales."

"I wasn't going to do it, at any rate," said I, growing a little cocky,
and deciding that some women, at any rate, can see more than meets the
eye.

But Mr Girdler, when he called in during the evening, was most
disappointing.

"So this is what you call being a comfort to your mother?" began he,
without so much as giving me a chance to say a word.

"Oh, but you don't understand, sir," began I.

"Don't understand!" said he.  "I understand you are a naughty little
boy"--to think that I should live to be called a little boy!--"and that
the mischief about your schooling is that you've not been smacked as
often as you ought.  Understand, indeed!  What do you suppose your
mother's to do with a boy like you, that's wasted his time, and then
tells people they don't understand?"

"I don't think Tommy meant--" began my mother; but my guardian was too
quick for her.

"No, that's just it.  They never do, and yet you pay fifty pounds a year
to teach him.  It doesn't matter to some children who else is troubled
as long as they enjoy themselves."

Children!  And I had once caught Parkin at cover-point!  "Go up to bed
now," said my guardian.  "Your mother and I must see what's to be done
with you.  Don't I understand, indeed?"

The conceit was fairly taken out of me now.  To be called a little boy
was bad enough; to be referred to as a child was even worse; but to be
sent to bed at a quarter to eight on a summer evening was the crowning
stroke.  Certainly, Plummer's itself was better than this.

What my mother and guardian said to one another I do not know.  My
mother, I think, had great faith in Mr Girdler's wisdom; and although
she tried not to think ill of me, would probably feel that he knew
better than she did.

I knew my fate next morning--it was worse than my most hideous
forebodings.

I was to work at my guardian's office every morning, and in the
afternoon I was to go up and learn Latin and arithmetic at--oh, how
shall I say it?--a girls' school!

For an hour after this discovery I candidly admit that I was sorry,
unfeignedly sorry, I had not turned sneak and informed against Harry
Tempest.  I think even he would have wished me to do it rather than
suffer this awful humiliation.

I had serious thoughts of running away, of going to sea, or sweeping a
London crossing.  But there were difficulties in the way; the chief of
them being my mother.

"You mustn't worry about it, Tommy," said she.  "Mr Girdler says it
will be the best thing for you.  It will be good for you to learn some
business, you know, and then in the afternoon you will find Miss
Bousfield very nice and clever."

"It's not the work I mind, mother," said I; "it's--it's going to a
girls' school."

"There's nothing very dreadful about it, I'm sure," said my mother, with
a smile.  "I was at one myself once."

"But," argued I, "you are only a--"

No--that wouldn't quite do to one's own mother.  So I stopped short.

"Besides," said she, "Mr Girdler thinks it the best thing, and he is
your guardian."

This was unanswerable, and I gave it up.

But I was not at all consoled.  The bare idea of Tempest, or Brown, or
any of the other fellows getting to know that I, Thomas Jones, aged
thirteen, who had held my own at Plummer's, and played in my day in the
third Eleven, was going to attend a girls' school, and be taught Latin
and sums by a--a female, was enough to make my hair stand on end.  How
they would laugh and wax merry at my expense!  How they would draw
pictures of me in the book covers with long curls and petticoats!  How
they would address me as "Jemima," and talk to one another about me in a
high falsetto voice!  How they would fall into hysterics when they met
me, and weep copiously, and ask me to lend them hairpins and parasols!
I knew what it would be like only too well, and I quaked as I imagined
it.

My one hope was that at Fallowfield nobody knew me; at least, nobody who
mattered.

"At least," said I to myself, "if I am to go and herd with a parcel of
girls, I'll let them see I'm something better than a girl myself."

When I presented myself at my guardian's office on the appointed morning
in order to start on my commercial career, I met with a reception even
less flattering than I had pictured to myself.

Mr Girdler was out, and had left no instructions about me.  So for two
hours I sat in the waiting-room, balancing my cap on my knee, and trying
to work up the spots on the dingy wall-paper into geometrical figures.

When at last he came, so far from commending my patience, he had the
face to reproach me for sitting there idle instead of getting some one
to set me to work.

"You are not at school here, remember," said he, by way of being
sarcastic; "you come here to work."

"I worked at school," said I meekly.

"So I hear," said he.  "Now go to Mr Evans, and tell him you want a
job."

Whereupon my genial guardian quitted me.  But he came back a moment
after.

"Remember you are to be at the girls' school at 2:30.  Tell Miss
Bousfield you are the little boy I spoke to her about, and mind you
behave yourself up there."

Was ever a young man in such a shameful disgrace?

Three days ago I had imagined myself everybody; two days ago I had at
least imagined myself somebody; yesterday I had discovered with pain
that I was nobody; and to-day I was destined to wonder if I was even
that.

Mr Evans raised his eyebrows when I delivered my message to him.

"Are you the governor's little ward," he inquired, "who's just finished
his education?  All right, my little man, we'll find a job for you.  Run
up High Street and bring me the time by the market clock, and here's a
halfpenny to buy yourself sweets on the way."

It occurred to me as odd that Mr Evans should want to know the time by
a clock which was quite ten minutes' walk from the office.  Still,
perhaps he had to set the office clocks by it, so I set off, wondering
whether I ought to take the halfpenny, but taking it all the same.

I decided that the dignified course would be to buy the sweets, but to
take them all back to him, so as to impress him with the fact that I was
not as devoted to juvenile creature comforts as he evidently thought me.

"Is that all you have left?" said he, when, after accomplishing my
errand, I presented them to him.  "My eye! you've made good use of your
time, and no mistake."

"I've not eaten a single one," said I.

"It would have been better for your digestion if you had only eaten a
single one, instead of swallowing half the lot.  I know the ways of you
boys.  Well, what's the time?"

"It was twenty-five past ten."

"I didn't ask you what it was--I want to know what it is."

It then occurred to me for the first time that Mr Evans was a
humourist.  It seemed to me a feeble joke, but he evidently thought it a
good one, as did also the other clerks to whom he communicated it.

The worst of it was that the more I tried to explain that, not having a
watch of my own, I could not answer for the time by the market clock at
any moment but that at which I saw it, the more they seemed to be
amused.  Some suggested I should go back with a bag and bring the time
in it.  Others, that I should put it on ten minutes, and then come back,
so as to arrive at the exact moment it was when I left it.  Others were
of opinion that the best way would be for me to go and fetch the market
clock with me.

Mr Evans, however, decided that my talents were not equal to the task
of bringing the time in any shape or form, and that the best thing I
could do was to sit down and lick up envelopes.  Which I accordingly
did, feeling rather small.  I cut my tongue and spoiled my appetite over
the operation, and was heartily glad when, after a couple of hours, Mr
Evans said--

"Master Tommy, we're going to lunch.  You've had yours, so you can stop
here, and keep shop till we return."

"I have to go to Miss Bousfield's at 2:30," said I.

"To go where?" they all inquired.  And as I blushed very red, and tried
to explain myself away, they made a great deal out of my unlucky
admission.

"You're young for that sort of thing," said one.  "I didn't go courting
myself before I was fifteen."

"I'd made up my mind Sarah Bousfield was going to be an old maid," said
another.  "Heigho! it's never too late to mend."

"I hear she keeps sugar-plums for good little girls," said another.

"And the bad little ones get whipped and put in the corner."

"He mustn't go like that, anyhow," said Mr Evans, who, for a
responsible head clerk of a big business, was the most flippant person I
had ever met; "look at his hair--all out of curl!  Come here, little
girl, and be made tidy."

Once at Plummer's I had come in second for the half-mile under fourteen,
and been captain of my side in the junior tug of war!  Now I was to have
my hair curled publicly!

It was no use resisting.  I was held fast while Evans with a long
penholder made ringlets of my back hair, and Scroop, with his five
fingers, made a fringe of my front.  My hat, moreover, was decorated
with quills by way of feathers, and a fan made of blotting-paper was
thrust into my hands.  Then I was pronounced to be nice and tidy, and
fit to go and join the other little girls.

I fear that the energy with which, as soon as I was released, I deranged
my locks and flung the feathers from my hat, amused my persecutors as
much as it solaced me.  I was conscious of their hilarious greetings as
I strolled up the street, trying to walk in a straight masculine way,
but hideously conscious of blushing cheeks and nervous gait.  I so far
forgot myself that, in my eagerness to display my male superiority, I
jostled against a lady, and disgraced myself by swaggering on without
even apologising for my rudeness--when, to my consternation, the lady
uttered my name, "Tommy."

It was my mother!  I was still within sight of the office.  How Evans
and his lot would make merry over this _contretemps_!  They wouldn't
know who it was who was putting her hand on my shoulder.  And yet I am
glad to say that I was spared that day the disgrace of being ashamed of
my own dear mother.  Let the fellows think what they liked.  If they had
mothers like mine they wouldn't be the cads they were!

So, with almost unnecessary pomp, I raised my hat to my parent, and put
my hand in her arm.

"You're going up to Miss Bousfield's," said she; "I thought I should
meet you.  What a hurry you were in!"

"Yes; I'm sorry I knocked against you, mother."

"I'm glad you did.  I'm longing to hear how you got on to-day."

"Oh, pretty well."

"Was it very hard work?"

"Not particularly."

"You'll soon be quite a man of business."

It occurred to me that if my business career was to be based on no
better experience than that I had hitherto had in my guardian's office,
I should not rank as a merchant prince in a hurry.

"Would you like me to go with you to Miss Bousfield's?"

"If you like, mother.  But I can go alone all right."  She was a brick.
She guessed what I hoped she would say, and she said it.

"Well, I'll be looking out for you at tea-time, dear boy," said she.
And she patted my arm lovingly as I started on.

I wished those fellows could have heard her voice and seen her kind
face.  _She_ treated me like a man--which was more than could be said
for them.

I went on my way soothed in my ruffled spirits.  But my perturbation
revived when I stood on the doorstep of the Girls' High School, and rang
the head mistress's bell.  It was a bitter pill, I can tell you, for a
fellow who had once been caned by Plummer for practising on the
horizontal bar without the mattress underneath to fall on.

Miss Bousfield was a shrewd, not disagreeable-looking little body, who
saved me all the trouble of self-introduction by knowing who I was and
why I came.

"Well, Jones," said she--I liked that, I had dreaded she would call me
Tommy--"here you are.  How is your mother?  Why, what a state your hair
is in!  I really think you'd like to go into the cloak room; you'll find
a brush and comb there.  It looks as if your hair were standing on end
with horror at me, you know."

Little she knew what my hair was on end about.  I was almost grateful to
her for the way she put it, and meekly retired to the cloak room,
where--I confess it--with a long-tailed girl's comb, and a soft brush,
and a big looking-glass, I contrived to restore my truant locks to their
former masculine order.

When I returned to the room.  Miss Bousfield was sitting at a table, at
which was also seated a young lady of about twenty, with an exercise
book and dictionary in front of her.

Was it a trap?  Was I to be taught along with the girls after all?  Miss
Bousfield evidently divined my perturbation and hastened to explain.

"Miss Steele, this is Master Jones, who is going to read Latin with us.
Miss Steele is one of my teachers, Jones, and we three are going to
brush up our classics together, you see."

Oh, all right.  That wasn't so bad.  I had no objection to assist Miss
Steele, or Miss Bousfield, for the matter of that, in brushing-up their
classics, as long as the girls at large were kept out of the way.

I acknowledged Miss Steele's greeting in a patronising way, and then
looked about for a chair.  I wished Mr Evans and his lot could see how
far removed I was from the common schoolgirl; here were two females
actually going to pick my brains for their own good.  If women must
learn Latin at all, they could hardly do better than secure a public
schoolboy to brush them up.

"Now, let us see," said Miss Bousfield, "how far we have all got.  Miss
Steele, you have read some Cicero, I know, already."

Cicero!  That girl read Cicero, when I had barely begun Caesar!  This
was a crusher for me.  How about the brushing-up now?

"And you, Jones, have you begun Cicero yet?"

"Well, no," I said, "not yet."

"Caesar, then; I think we shall both be ready to take that up again.
How far were you--or shall we begin at the beginning?"

"Better begin at the beginning," said I, anxious not to have to confess
that I had not yet got through the first chapter.

But before we had gone many lines, Miss Bousfield, I could see, began to
have her doubts about my syntax; and after a little conference about
syntax, the question of verbs came up, unpleasantly for me; and after
deciding we had a little brushing-up to do there, the conversation
turned on declensions, a subject on which I had very little definite
information to afford to these two females in distress.

I verily believe we should have come to exchanging views on the
indefinite article itself, had not Miss Bousfield taken the bull by the
horns, and said--

"I think the best thing, Jones, will be for us to assume we know
nothing, to begin with, and start at the beginning.  We shall easily get
over the ground then, and it will be all the better to be sure of our
footing.  Let us take Exercise 1. in the grammar."

Miss Steele pouted a little, as if to indicate it was hardly worth her
while, as a reader of Cicero, to waste her time over "a high tree," "a
bad boy," "a beautiful table," and so on.  But I felt sure the exercise
would do her good, and was glad Miss Bousfield set her to it.

She irritated me by having it all written down in a twinkling, and going
on with Cicero on her own account, while I plodded on up the "high tree"
and around the "beautiful table."  I hoped Miss Bousfield would rebuke
her for insubordination, but she did not, and I began to think much less
of both ladies as the afternoon went on.

It did not add to my satisfaction to get my exercise back with fifteen
corrections scored across it in bold red pencil--whereas Miss Steele's
was not even looked at.

I thought of suggesting that it would be only fair that she and I should
be treated alike, when Miss Bousfield capped all by saying to her
governess--

"Perhaps, Miss Steele, you will go through the exercise with Jones and
show him where he has gone wrong.  Then he can write it out again for
you, and try not to have any mistake this time."

This was really too much!  To be passed on to a girl who was learning
Latin herself, and for her to score about my exercises!  It was a
conspiracy to degrade me in the eyes of myself and my fellow-mortals.

But protest was rendered impossible by Miss Bousfield quitting the room
and leaving me to the mercies of her deputy.

"Why," said Miss Steele, not at all unkindly, but with a touch of
raillery in her voice--"why were you such a goose, Jones, as to pretend
you knew what you didn't?"

"I didn't; I forgot, that's all," said I.

"Well, look here, Jones," said she, in a friendly way--and, by the way,
she was not at all bad-looking--"if you really want to get up Latin, and
mean to work, I'll do my best to coach you; but if you're only playing
at learning, I've something better to do."

"I'm not playing," said I.  "I don't know why I've got to come and learn
Latin at all."

"I suppose you are going to a school some day, aren't you?"

"I've been to one, and I've left," said I.

"Left?" said she, with a little laugh.

"Well, then, I was expelled," said I.

"Tell me all about it."

And I did, and found her not only interested and sympathetic, but
decidedly indignant on my account.

"It was a great shame," said she, "especially as your friend never shot
the dog at all."

"He's all right, lucky chap," said I; "he's got an exhibition to Low
Heath, and is going there after the holidays."

"Why don't you get an exhibition too, Jones?"

The question astounded me.  I get an exhibition!  I who had been licked
once a week for bad copies, and had been told by every teacher I had had
anything to do with that I was a hopeless dunce.

"Why not?" said the siren at my side.  "You're not a dunce.  I can tell
that by the way you picked up some of the Caesar just now.  You're lazy,
that's all.  That's easily cured."

"But I'd have no chance at Low Heath.  Tempest was a dab at lessons."

"He's older than you.  Besides, the junior exhibitions are not as hard
to get.  When will you be fourteen?"

"July next year."

"Just twelve months.  Why not try, Jones?  I'll back you up.  I've
coached my young brother, and he got into Rugby.  You needn't tell any
one--so if you miss nobody will be any the wiser.  It will make all the
difference to have an exam, to aim at."

I stared in wonder at Miss Steele.  That young woman could have twisted
me round her finger.

"I'll try," said I.

"Not unless you mean to work like a horse," said she.

"All serene," said I; "honour bright."

"Then it's a bargain.  Mark my word, we'll pull through."

Whereat we fell hammer and tongs on Exercise Number 1. of the grammar.



CHAPTER FIVE.

A "COACH" DRIVE!

If any one had told me two days ago that it would be reserved to an
assistant teacher in a girls' school to inspire me with an ardent
interest in Latin and arithmetic I should have laughed him to scorn.

Miss Steele, however, succeeded in achieving the impossible.  I am bound
to confess that my new-born ardour was not mainly due to affection for
the dead language in question, or even to esteem for my preceptress.
But the idea of taking Low Heath, so to speak, by storm, had fairly
roused my ambition.  The glory of rising superior to my fate, of shaking
off the ill-tutored Mr Evans and his works, and rejoining my old
school-comrade with all the prestige of a fellow-exhibitioner,
captivated my imagination and steeled me to the endurance of hardships
of which I had hitherto conceived myself utterly incapable.

Miss Steele had no notion of letting me off my bargain.  She procured
particulars of the examinations, and very formidable appeared the list
of subjects as we conned them.  Still she was firm in her belief that I
could do it if I only worked, and since her eagerness fully equalled my
own, there was not much chance of my work dropping slack.

If any other incentive was wanted it was the supreme discomfort of my
position at my guardian's office.

My comrades there persistently misunderstood me.

They put me down as an opiniated young prig, with whom all sorts of
liberties might be taken, and out of whom it was lawful, for their own
amusement, to take unlimited "rise."

I was, of course, unmercifully chaffed about the girls' school.

"He's getting on," said one of them, on the very morning after my
_debut_.  "They walk out together."

"That was not Miss Bousfield you saw me with at all," I explained.
"That was my mother."

"Quite time she came to look after you, too.  How did she like your
curls?  You should put them in papers overnight, then we shouldn't have
to do them every day."

Where upon I was seized, and had my locks tied up in wads of blotting-
paper, and ordered to sit down and lick envelopes, and not dare to put
my hand to my head till leave was accorded me from headquarters.

In this plight my guardian came in and discovered me.

"Please, Mr Girdler--" said I, not waiting for him to remark on my
curious appearance.

But Mr Girdler, who was not ordinarily given to mirth, abruptly left
the room with a smile on his face before I could proceed.

When he re-entered he was stern and severe.

"Make yourself decent at once, sir," said he.  "No, I don't want any of
your explanations.  No doubt they are highly satisfactory.  I begin to
understand now why you were sent away from school.  It strikes me an
idiot asylum is the proper place for you."

I dismally tore my curl-papers out of my hair and went on with my work
till the blessed hour of release came.

Then I hied straight to the nearest barber.

"I want my hair as short as you can cut it," said I.

"Very good, sir; we can give you the county crop, if you like."

"Is that the shortest you do?" inquired I, not knowing what the "county
crop" was.

"Well, sir, we ain't asked to take more off as a rule, unless it is a
clean shave you want."

"No, the county crop will do," said I.

And, to do the barber justice, I got it.  I barely knew myself in the
glass when the operation was over.  I had some misgivings as to the
remarks of Evans & Company in the morning--at any rate, they wouldn't
curl my hair any more.

Miss Bousfield and Miss Steele regarded me with something like dismay
when they saw me, but were polite enough to make no remark beyond giving
me permission to wear my hat if I felt a draught.

"Miss Steele has been telling me of your plan of work," said Miss
Bousfield; "and I fully approve, on the understanding you are serious
about it.  I am not so sanguine as Miss Steele is; still, I do not wish
to discourage you, Jones.  But understand, it means a year's hard work."

I assured her I was prepared for any amount of work, and Miss Steele,
whose ambition was as keenly aroused as mine, gave a general promise on
my behalf that I would work like a horse.

"Now," said she, when Miss Bousfield had left us, "you're in for it,
Jones.  If you don't work, mind, it will be a disgrace to me as well as
you."

I fear, during the months that followed, this ardent young "coach" was
frequently on the point of disgrace.  For a week or two I surprised
myself with my industry.  Then I caught myself wondering at odd times
whether I was really as sure of passing as I fancied, and whether, if I
failed, it would not be a horrible sell to have worked so hard for
nothing.

Then for a day or so I came in a little late, and took to grumbling over
my tasks.

"Now, look here, Jones," said she, one day, "you were five minutes late
on Monday, ten minutes late on Tuesday and Wednesday, and a quarter of
an hour late to-day.  How much is that in the week?"

"Forty minutes," said I; mental arithmetic was a strong point with me.

"Very good; there's forty minutes lost.  The examination may turn on the
very lesson you might have learned in that time.  Now, I'm not going to
threaten you, but what should you say if I were to call at the office
and fetch you every day?"

I nearly jumped out of my chair.

"Oh, don't, please don't, Miss Steele!" said I.  "I'll be here to the
second, in future, I promise."

"All right," said she, with a smile, and the subject dropped.

This dreadful threat kept me up to the mark for the next few weeks, but
even it lost its terrors in time, and my preceptress had to apply the
spur in other ways as the time went on.

Once, after I had been particularly slack, and had, moreover, been so
rude to her that she ended the lesson abruptly, I thought it was all up.
For, when I presented myself next day, I was informed by the servant
that Miss Steele was busy, and had no time to see me.

I was locked out!  My dismay knew no bounds.  Suppose she had "chucked"
me altogether, what would become of my chance of getting into Low Heath?

I retired home in great perturbation, and confided the state of the case
to my mother, who advised me there and then to sit down and write an
apology.

I had never done such a thing in my life.  Once I had verbally begged
Tempest's pardon for some error; but to commit myself in writing to a
girl!

"My dear Miss Steele," I wrote,--"I'm sorry.  Yours truly, T.  Jones."

"That will do very well," said my mother.  "It's not too long, at the
same time it says what you want to say."

I wasn't altogether pleased with it myself, but allowed the maid to take
it up to the school, with instructions to wait for an answer.

In due time she returned with a missive from Miss Steele.

"My dear Jones,--To-morrow as usual.  Yours truly, M.  Steele."

I am sure no model letter-writer ever said as much in as few words.

This little correspondence cleared the air for the time.  No reference
was made to it when I turned up as usual the next day; but from the way
I worked, and the way she taught, it was evident we had both had a
shake.

My next relapse was even more serious.  It came early in the spring,
after our work had proceeded for about nine months.

I really had made good progress all round.  Not in Latin only, but in
Greek grammar, arithmetic, and English, and was naturally inclined to
feel a little cocky of the result.

"Don't crow, Jones," she said; "you've a lot to do yet."

But I did not altogether agree with her, and was inclined to indulge
myself a little of an evening when I was supposed to be preparing my
work.  In an evil day I fell across an old book-shop, and found two
books, which helped to undo me.  One was a rollicking story of a pirate
who swept the Western Main, and captured treasure, and seized youths and
maidens, and ran blockades, and was finally brought to book in a
sportsmanlike manner by a jolly young English middy, amid scenes of
terrific slaughter amidships.  That was one purchase.  The other was
even more disturbing.  It was a "crib" to the arithmetic I was doing,
with all the sums beautifully worked out and the answers given.

So--I must make the confession--I astonished Miss Steele greatly for a
while by my extraordinary proficiency in arithmetic, and during the same
time spent my evenings in imagination on the high seas, flying aloft the
black flag, and shooting across the bows of Her Majesty's ships wherever
I sighted them.

This career of duplicity could not be expected to last long.  One
afternoon Miss Steele brought matters to a crisis by calling upon me to
work a sum on the spot which was not in the book.

I failed egregiously.

"That's singular," said she; "it's far simpler than those you brought
with you to-day.  How long did it take you to do them?"

I looked hard at Miss Steele, and she looked hard at me.  The pirate
game was up at last.

"About two minutes each," said I.

"_Two_ minutes?"

"Yes--as fast as I could copy them out of the crib.  I'm sorry, Miss
Steele."

She shut up her book abruptly.

"I didn't expect it of you, Jones," said she; "you've been making a fool
of me.  I've lost confidence in you; now you can go."

"Oh, I say.  Miss Steele, I'm so awfully--"

"Be quiet, sir, and go!" said she, more fiercely than I had ever known
her.

I took up my cap and went.  She was in no humour to listen to
explanations, but it was clear I had done for myself now.  After what
had happened she was not likely to give me another chance.

I did not care to tell my mother how matters stood this time.  It would
be difficult to put my case in a favourable light, and I was quite sure
my mother could not help me out of my difficulty.

I solemnly burned my crib that night in the parlour fire, after every
one was in bed.  It took ages to consume, and nearly set the chimney on
fire in the operation.  But when that was done I was as far off a
solution of my difficulty as ever.

I hardly slept a wink, and in the morning my mother added to my
discomfort by remarking on my looks.

"You're working too hard, dear boy," said she.  "I must ask Miss Steele
to give you a little holiday, or you'll be quite knocked up."

"Please don't," said I.  "I'm all right."

Here the postman's knock caused a diversion.

"A letter for you, Tommy," said my mother.

It was from Tempest, of all people--the first he had condescended to
write me since we had parted company in Plummer's hall nearly a year
ago.

It was a rambling, patronising effusion, in his usual style; but every
word of it, in my present plight, had a sting for me.

"It's a pity you're not here," wrote he; "it's a ripping place.
Everything about the place is ripping except the drilling master and the
dumplings on Mondays, which are both as vile as vile can be.  I'm in the
upper fifth, and shall probably get my ribbon and perhaps my house after
summer.  Plummer's was regular tomfooling to this.  We've a match on
with Rugby this term, and I'm on the reserve for the Eleven.  I suppose
you know young Brown is coming here; though I'm sorry to say as a day
boy.  His people are going to live in the town, so he'll be able to come
on the cheap.  I shall do what I can for him, but I expect he'll have a
hot time, for the day boys are rather small beer.  The exhibitioners
have the best time of it.  If Brown could get a junior exhibition and
live in school, he could fag for me and have a jolly time.  But poor
Dicky hasn't got it in him.  I got rather lammed after I got home from
Plummer's; but it was all right when Plummer wrote to say that a burglar
had shot the dog, and he was sorry there had been a mistake, and hoped
I'd go back.  Catch me!  It's better fun here--as much cricket as you
like, and a river, and gymnasium, and all sorts of sprees.  It wouldn't
be half bad if you were here, kid; but I suppose you're a young gent
with a topper and a bag at your guardian's office.  I hope it suits
you--wouldn't me--" and so on.

How this letter made me long to be at Low Heath, and how it made me
realise what an ass I had been to go in for that crib!  I really felt
too bad to go that day to Miss Steele, even if she would have let me!
and wandered about cudgelling my brains how on earth I could get her to
take me back again.

She wouldn't believe my protestations, I knew; but she might believe
deeds, not words.

So I shut myself up in my room and took down my arithmetic, and worked
out sum after sum all off my own bat, till my brain reeled and I could
hardly distinguish one figure from another.  Some I knew were wrong,
others I hoped were right; all were _bona fide_.  I stuck to it till
nearly midnight, and then, merely writing my name on the top, put them
into an envelope, under the flap of which I wrote, "I've burnt the crib.
Try me this once," and posted them to my offended teacher.

No answer came for twenty-four hours, which I spent on pins and needles,
working away frantically during my leisure hours, and occupying part of
my business time in personally avenging an insult offered to Miss
Steele's name by one of my guardian's junior clerks.  I wished she could
have seen me.  I got a terrible blow on the eye, but I gave him two, and
caused him to regret audibly that he had spoken disparagingly of my
cruel fair.

Next morning a note came to my mother.

"Please tell your boy I shall be in this afternoon."

In fear and trembling I presented myself, and confronted not Miss Steele
but Miss Bousfield, who addressed me in terse and forcible language, and
gave me to understand that I was a person of extremely second-rate
character and attainments.  I acknowledged it, but hoped for an
opportunity of improving her impressions.

"I shall leave it to Miss Steele to do as she thinks best," said the
head mistress.  "I am sorry indeed her time has been wasted over a
worthless pupil.  You had better wait till she comes."

I waited grimly, like a culprit for the jury.  When she came in and saw,
as I suppose, my woebegone face, I read hope in her manner.

"I got your note, Jones," said she.

"Oh!  I say, Miss Steele, I'm really frightfully sorry.  I know it was a
caddish thing to do, especially when you had been so kind.  Look here, I
did all those sums myself, without help; and here's another batch I've
done since; and--and--" (here I resolved to play a trump card) "and I
got this black eye sticking up for you."

That settled it.  She smiled once more and said, "Well, Jones, I'll say
no more about it this once.  I had made up my mind it was no use our
going on together; but I'll try, if you will."

"Try--I'll kill myself working," said I, "to make up."

"That wouldn't do much good," said she; "but I'll try to forget all this
ever happened, and we'll go on just where we left off."

"That was page 72," said I eagerly; "and, I say, Miss Steele, you
remember my telling you about Tempest, and Dicky Brown, you know;
well--"

"Is that on page 72, or is it something which we can talk about when
work is done?"

So I got my chance once again, and this time I stuck to it.

The nearer the time came, the more desperately we worked.  Sometimes
Miss Steele had positively to hunt me out for a walk, or, if I would not
go alone, to drag me along with her to some place where, regardless of
our possible detection by Evans and his friends, we could combine fresh
air and education.

The fatal day came at last when I had to go off to my ordeal.  I was
obliged at the last moment to disclose my well-kept secret to my mother
and my guardian.  The former fell on my neck, the latter grunted
incredulously and embarrassed me by presenting me with a five-shilling
piece.

Miss Steele came down to see me off at the station.  "Keep cool," said
she; "sit where you can see the clock, and don't try to answer two
questions at once."

Never did tyro get better advice!

I was too excited to heed much of the big stately building I was so
eager some day to claim as my own school.  It was holiday time, and only
a little band of combatants like myself huddled into one corner of the
big hall, and gazed up in an awestruck way at the portrait of the
Jacobean knight to whom Low Heath owed its foundation.

To me it was all like a dream.  I woke to discover a paper on the desk
before me; a paper bristling with questions, each of them challenging me
to get into the school if I could.  Then I remember dashing my pen into
the ink and beginning to write.

"Keep cool.  Keep your eye on the clock.  Try one question at a time,"
echoed a voice in my ear.

How lonely I felt there all by myself!  How I wished I could turn and
see _her_ at my side!

The clock crawled round from eleven to three, and I went on writing.
Then I remember a hand coming along the desk and taking the papers out
of my sight.  Then a bewildered train journey home, and a hundred
questions at the other end.

I went on dreaming for a week, conscious sometimes of my mother's face,
sometimes of Miss Steele's, sometimes of Mr Evans's.  But what I did
with myself in the interval I should be sorry to be called upon to tell.

At last, one morning, I woke with a vengeance, as I held in my hand a
paper on which were printed a score or so of names, third among which I
made out the words--

"Jones, T.--(Miss M.  Steele, High School, Fallowfield): Exhibition,
£40."

So I was a Low Heathen at last!



CHAPTER SIX.

UP TO FORM.

I have reason to fear that for a fortnight after I received the
astounding news of my scholastic success I was an intolerable nuisance
to my friends and a ridiculous spectacle to my enemies.

I may have had some excuse.  I had worked hard, and got myself into a
"tilted" state of mind altogether.  Still, that was no reason why I
should consider that the whole world was standing still to look on at my
triumph; still less why I should patronise my mother and Miss Steele and
Miss Bousfield as three well-intentioned persons who had just had an
object-lesson in the inferiority of their sex.

My mother and Miss Steele were too delighted to mind my airs.  They were
really proud--one to be my mother, the other to be my "coach."  And when
I strutted in and talked as if they barely knew how honoured they were
by my company, they laughed good-humouredly, and said to one another,--

"No wonder he's pleased with himself, dear boy."

Miss Bousfield was less disposed to bow the knee.

"I hope you won't forget what you owe to Miss Steele," said she.  "I
never hoped she could make as much as she did of such unpromising
material.  It's what I always have said--good teaching can make a
scholar of a dunce."

"Ah," said I, "you thought I was a dunce.  I determined you should see I
wasn't.  I am glad your school gets the credit of the exhibition."

"I'll wait and see how you turn out, before I am glad," said she.  "I
hope the High School will not get a reputation for turning out prigs,
Jones."

I couldn't quite understand Miss Bousfield.  She was not as cordial as I
thought she might be, considering the honour I had brought upon her
school.

My guardian's clerks were even less impressed by my distinction than
she.

"What's the matter this morning?" said Mr Evans on the day of my
triumph, as I sat smiling inwardly at my desk.

"Nothing particular," said I.

"It looks as if it was bad stomach-ache--I'd try camomile pills, if I
were you."

"Thank you--I don't require pills.  If you want to know, I've been up
for an exam, and passed."

"Been up where?"

"Up for an exam.--an examination," said I, surprised at their density.

"Where, at the girls' school?"

"Girls' school, no; at Low Heath."  Mr Evans looked grave, and beckoned
his comrades a little nearer.

"Awfully sad, isn't it?" said he, with a seriousness which surprised me.

"Yes.  It's a good institution, though.  My uncle tried to get a case in
there once, but failed."  I wasn't surprised to hear that.

"They only let the _very_ dotty ones in," said Mr Evans.  "Besides,
it'll be a part payment case--at least, I should think the governor will
plank down something."

"It's worth £40 a year for four years," said I, understanding very
imperfectly the drift of these remarks, but pleased at least to find I
had succeeded in impressing my fellow-clerks.

"Ah, so much?--they can't treat cases like yours for nothing.  When are
you going in?"

"In September.  It's a splendid place--five hundred fellows there."

"So many!  It's rather sad to think about, isn't it, Hodges?  Five
hundred!  What a lot of trouble there is in the world, to be sure!"

"I can't say I shall be sorry--I know one or two chaps there already."

"Very likely, if it runs in the family at all."

"What runs?" said I, not taking him.

Mr Evans tapped his forehead.

"Never mind," said he, "it's not your fault.  I expect four years will
do marvels with you.  We'll come and see you sometimes, on visiting
days."

"Ah, I don't suppose there are visiting days, except for parents," said
I.

"I know one or two of the staff, though," said one of the party.  "I
shall be able to hear about you from them."

"Oh, all right," said I.  "I hope things here will go on all right when
I'm at school."

"School?" said Mr Evans, stooping with his hands on his knees, and
looking into my face.  "Did you say school?  Is Low Heath a school?"

"Rather.  What did you think it was?"

"We thought it was an idiot asylum," said Mr Evans.  And a shout of
laughter at my expense confirmed his statement.

I did not deign to explain; and for the few days I remained at the
office I made no further reference to my academic triumphs, though my
comrades rarely failed to make merry over the asylum.

At the end of a fortnight I began to come to myself, and realise that I
had not exactly borne my honours blushingly.  And I was glad when my
mother proposed a week or two at the seaside, to brace up before
plunging into the ocean of public school fife.

My guardian, who had of late grown fairly civil to me, in the prospect
of getting me off his hands, was good enough to release me from the
office; and I shook the dust of that detestable place off my feet with
unfeigned thankfulness.

Mr Evans wanted to get up a farewell supper for me, and I was very near
allowing myself the honour, when I accidentally discovered that all the
provisions were to be ordered in my name and the bill sent to me.
Whereupon I declined the invitation with thanks, and regretted that a
previous engagement would prevent my having the pleasure of joining
their party.

Once in the quiet of the seaside, with my mother for companion, I
recovered my proper frame of mind, and began to take sober views of the
prospect before me.

I wrote to Tempest--rather a cocky letter, perhaps, but one full of
delight at the prospect of joining him at Low Heath, and claiming his
patronage and support.

His reply was characteristic to say the least.

"The examiners for exhibitions here are the biggest muffs out.  They
plough the only men worth having and let in no end of scugs.  The
consequence is.  Low Heath is packed full of asses, as you'll find out.
I'm glad they let you in, though, as it will be sport having you here
and making you sing small.  I do hope, though, it won't get out that
you've been coached by a female, or there'll be a terrific lark.  I'm
getting quite a dab at photography, and shall have my camera up next
term.  Mind you get the right-shaped boiler, or I shall cut you.  The
kids are to be stopped wearing round tops like their betters, so you'd
best cut yours square.  Brown was too 'cute to try for an exhibition.
It's bad enough for him to be a day boy, but it would be a jolly sight
worse to be an exhibitioner as well.  When you come up, mind you're not
to collar me.  It's bad form for a kid to collar a senior.  Wait till I
speak to you, or else get some chap to bring you and introduce you.
Fellows who shirk form get jolly well lammed; so you'd better go easy at
first.  Bring plenty of pocket-money, and some thick boots for kicking
chaps back.--Yours truly, H.T.  Tempest."

This letter both gratified and perturbed me.  It was pleasing to be
hailed as one of the inner circle of a fellow like Tempest; but it made
me suspect that I should not be taken into the fold at my own valuation,
but that of my betters, which in a public school is a very different
thing.  The little details, too, about dress and manners rather startled
me.  For supposing I had gone up not knowing these things, what mistakes
I should have made!  Suppose, for instance, I had gone up in a billycock
with a round instead of a square top; or suppose I had hailed Tempest
without his first speaking to me, what would have become of me?  I
trembled to think of it, and was glad to feel I had a friend at court
who would see I didn't "shirk form."

What made me still more uneasy was the reference to my connection with a
girl's school.  The prize list had made it appear, to any one who did
not know better, that I was a pupil from Miss Steele's, High School,
Fallowfield.  Suppose this list should get into the hands of any of the
fellows, or that some other new boy should carelessly leave his copy
about!  I wished I had had more sense than to mention the High School at
all.  This came of my chivalrous desire, said I to myself, to give Miss
Steele and her principal the benefit of my distinction.  Now I might
have to thank them for endless trouble.  I did my best to hope the worst
would not happen.

"Fellows never read prize lists of exams, they've not been in for,"
thought I; "and when they have been in, they never trouble themselves
about any one's name but their own.  Why, I haven't even noticed where a
single other chap comes from.  They may all be girls' schools, for all I
know.  It's not likely any one has noticed mine."

And to avoid all accident I dropped mine into the fire, and had to stand
my mother's reproaches for destroying a document she had intended to
treasure till her dying day.

As the time for my going to Low Heath approached, I began to turn my
attention seriously to my _trousseau_.

My first care was to get the square-topped boiler, and a rare job I had
to procure it.  None of the hatters in Fallowfield knew of such a shape
in young gents' hats; and the shopkeepers in Wynd, whither I went over
on purpose, were equally benighted.  My mother, too, protested that she
had never heard of such a kind of hat, and that it would be hideous when
I got it.

That was no fault of mine.  It was the Low Heath form, and that was
enough for me.

At length I heard of a hat of the kind at Deercut, five miles off, and
walked thither.  It had been made, said the hatter, for a young sporting
party who attended to a gentleman's stables, and knew a thing or two.
He had got into trouble, it was explained, and was "doing his time on
the circular staircase," which I took to mean the treadmill.  That was
the reason the article had been thrown on the maker's hands.  It seemed
just the thing Tempest described.  The top was as flat as the lid of a
work-box; indeed, it was precisely like a somewhat broad-brimmed
chimney-pot-hat cut down to half height; and after a little pinching in
at the sides fitted me beautifully.  The maker was delighted to be able
to suit me, and smiled most graciously when I paid him my five shillings
and walked out of the shop with my junior exhibitioner's "boiler" on my
head.

I set down to envy or ignorance the jeers of the village youths who
encountered me on my way home.  Some people will laugh at anything they
do not understand.  My mother's protests, when she saw me, however, were
not so easy to dispose of.

"Why, Tommy, it makes you look like a common cheap-jack," said she.
"It's not a gentleman's hat at all.  I'm sure they would not tolerate it
at Low Heath."

"On the contrary," said I, "it's the form there.  You might say the same
of mortar boards or blue-coat dresses.  It all depends on the school."

"But are you sure Tempest was not exaggerating?"

"Tempest is the most particular chap about form I know," said I.

"Well, dear, promise me you won't wear this dreadful hat till you go to
school.  Wear your nice cap that suits you so well till then."

I humoured her.  Indeed, I was a little shy myself of meeting Mr Evans,
or any of that set, in my new garb.  They would be sure to pass their
nasty personal remarks upon it.  It would be better to preserve it in
its virgin purity for my entrance to Low Heath.

I took the precaution to write to Tempest and mention that I had got it,
appending to my letter a rough sketch of the hat, so that, if there were
anything wrong about it, he would be able to correct me.

He wrote back in great good spirits.

"Just the thing, kid.  It'll take the shine out of all the boilers up
here.  Did I tell you about gloves?  The knowing ones mostly sport
lavender; but the outsiders don't wear any, except at the first call-
over in the term, when of course it's compulsory.  One muff last term
got pretty well lammed because he only had two-button gloves instead of
six.  I believe one or two others were just as bad, only they didn't get
kotched; but it was a lesson to them.  I wonder if young Brown will be
up to the tips, or whether he'll turn up in black boots instead of tan.
I sha'n't write to him, because he's a town-boy, and it would be low.
Ta-ta.  Don't forget to wear your collar outside your great-coat, or I
sha'n't speak to you.--Yours, till then, H.T."

I kept this letter carefully from my mother.  I knew it would only
distress her, and suggest all sorts of difficulties.  For, dear soul, it
would be so hard to explain to her the exigencies of school form.  What
would have become of me without old Tempest?  I should have come utterly
to grief, I felt.  My only fear was that he might have forgotten
something which it was as important I should be made aware of as the
hat, or the six-button lavender gloves, or the tan boots.

I am afraid I must plead guilty to a little duplicity in the matter of
purchasing these highly necessary articles of my kit.  I had to persuade
my mother to allow me to choose my own gloves and boots; and expended
the money in such a manner that I could show her an ordinary pair of
each, while the special articles were carefully concealed in my box.
She thought the cheap black shoes and dog-skin gloves I paraded before
her dear at the price; but she little knew that I had safely stowed away
an elegant pair of light lavender gloves and a pair of tan boots of the
most fashionable appearance.

I had some difficulty about the former.  For six-button gloves for young
gents was not a "stock-line" in any of the shops.  I had finally to get
a lady's twelve-button pair and cut them down to suit my requirements.
The tan boots were more easily procured, although it grated somewhat
against my feelings to be sent over to the ladies' side of the shop to
get them, as they were not kept for boys on the men's side.  As it was,
I feared they did not come up to Tempest's description of "thick boots
for kicking back in," but they were the thickest I could procure.

At length my preparations were all complete.  My mother had been an
angel about them all.  She had let me have my own way, and forborne
criticism when my taste--or rather my conjecture as to what the Low
Heath form might demand--ran counter to hers.  On this account she made
no remark about my check shirts, or the steel chain which, after the
most approved fashion, came out from under the side of my waistcoat and
supported the weight of my keys in my side trouser pocket.  I confess it
was an inconvenient arrangement.  It was impossible to unlock my
portmanteau without either half undressing, or kneeling down so as to
bring the end of the chain on a level with the keyhole, or else standing
the portmanteau on a chair or table to bring it up to the key.  But it
was undoubtedly the smart way of carrying keys.  So the tailor said, and
so one or two friends in whom I confided also assured me.

I was really quite glad when I had sat down on the floor beside my trunk
for the last time, and knew I should not have to perform with the key
again till I was unpacking at Low Heath.

My handbag, for certain reasons, I carried with me unlocked.  It
contained, to tell the truth, the hat and gloves and tan boots and other
_articles de rigueur_ which I did not exactly like to start off in, but
which I was resolved to don during the journey, so as to dawn on the Low
Heath horizon altogether "up to Cocker," as Tempest would say.

At the last moment my spirits failed me a little.  I had been so taken
up with my own plans that I had almost forgotten I was leaving my mother
solitary, and turning my back on the sunshine of affection which during
the last year had come to be such a natural and soothing feature of my
surroundings.

"Don't forget the old home, Tommy," she said.  "God bless you and keep
you good, and innocent, and honest!  Don't be led astray by bad
companions, but try to help others to be good.  And, Tommy dear, don't
try to be a man just yet--be the dear boy you are--don't try to be
anything else, and--" But here the train began to move, and there was
barely time for a farewell kiss.

What she said ran rather in my head, especially the last exhortation,
which I was sorry she had uttered.  For I was quite sure she was
referring to my nervous desire to do everything correctly at the new
school; and it grieved me that she should speak of it as trying to be
something I was not.

Of course I would remember all she said.  There was not much fear of my
being led astray; it was much more likely that I, as an exhibitioner,
would be looked up to by some of the ordinary small boys to show them a
lead.  What with Tempest to befriend me at headquarters, and my prestige
as a scholar, and the fact that I knew a pretty good deal about school
already, it was as likely as not I might be instrumental in helping one
or two lame dogs over the stiles of their first term.

My only travelling companion was a motherly sort of person of the farmer
class, who eyed me affectionately--too affectionately to please me--and
attempted to condole with me on the sorrow of leaving home.

"Never mind, dearie," said she--Cheek! for a stranger to call a chap
"dearie."

"You'll be a bit lonely at first, so you will; but you'll get used to
it, and it won't be so long to holiday time, and then you'll see mamma
again."

I wished she wouldn't.  She misunderstood me.  I wasn't thinking about
the holidays at all.  The fact was, I was thinking about my boots and
hat in the bag, and wondering when I should put them on.

Bother it!  Why should I mind her or her remarks?  Some other new chap
might get in at the next station, and I couldn't change before him.  I'd
better get myself up to form now, and so be ready.

So, to the old lady's surprise, I proceeded to take off my shoes and put
on the thick tan boots in their place.  She watched me in mingled
admiration and surprise--no doubt the fresh yellow was very imposing,
and made me look as if I was shod in gold.  But the High Street at Low
Heath would presently be sparkling with a hundred pairs of such boots,
so what mattered an old lady's temporary astonishment?  It was the same
about the hat--indeed worse.  For at the sight of that particularly
sporting adornment, she threw up her hands and exclaimed,--

"What a funny little fellow, to be sure!"

I tried to look grave, and as if I had not heard her, but I felt very
conscious of the hat all the same, and only hoped another new boy would
get in presently, so that she might see that a thing might be the
fashion and yet she not know it.

I was a good deal perplexed about the lavender gloves.  Of course, I had
not to wear these until call-over that afternoon, or possibly next
morning.  But I might as well try them on now.  And the difficulty was
that it was very difficult to button the six buttons all the way up
without baring my arm half-way at least to the elbow.  I made a feeble
attempt, but it presented so many difficulties, and evidently so
seriously perturbed my companion, that I abandoned the attempt,
resolving to try them on under the bedclothes that night.

At the first station a youth of about my own age, with a hat-box and
bag, got into the carriage.  Was he, I wondered, a Low Heath chap?
Evidently not.  He wore a straw hat, and boots of the ordinary colour,
and--Whew! what a lucky thing I had not forgotten it!  He wore his white
collar inside the velvet of his great-coat.  And so should I have
continued to do, had not the sight of him called Tempest's injunction to
wear it outside to my memory.  I availed myself of the next tunnel to
rectify this serious omission, and had the satisfaction, when we emerged
into daylight, of noticing that neither of my fellow-travellers appeared
to pay much heed to the change.  They both stared at me now and then;
but the boy evidently grew tired of that, and curled himself up in a
corner of the carriage and read a _Boy's Own Paper_.

I presently followed his example, and what with reading, and speculating
on my coming entry into Low Heath, and an occasional thought for the
little home at Fallowfield, the time went quickly by.

"Is this Low Heath station?" inquired I, as the train began to slacken
speed.

"Yes," said the boy, regarding me from head to foot with evidently
increased curiosity.  "Are you a new kid at the school?"

"Yes," said I.

"Oh my!  What a lark!" said he.

I was glad he thought it so.

"Are you at the school?" inquired I.

"Looks like it," said he, getting together his traps hurriedly, and
bounding from the carriage with what I fancied was a broad grin on his
face.

So here I was at last!



CHAPTER SEVEN.

COMING DOWN A PEG OR TWO.

I had half hoped Tempest would be down at the station to meet me.  But
he was not: and I had to consider on the spur of the moment how to make
my entry into Low Heath.

Either I might walk, as I noticed a good many of the fellows who got out
of the train did, or I might charter a private fly, as a few of the
swells did, or I might go up in one of the school omnibuses, which was
evidently the popular mood of transportation.  I was so earnestly
desirous to do the correct thing, that I was nearly doing nothing at
all, and finally found myself standing almost alone on the platform with
the last omnibus ready to start.

Surely they might make some arrangement, thought I, for meeting
exhibitioners and taking them up.  How did I know this omnibus was not a
town-boys' vehicle, or one dedicated to the service of the inferior
boys?  Perhaps it would be better--

"Right away, Jimmy; off you go!" called one of the youths on the
knifeboard, whom I recognised as my late travelling companion.

At this point I decided I would risk it, and go up by omnibus after all.

"Wait!"  I called.  "I'm coming too."

"Fire away, Jimmy.  Cut along!" shouted the youth.  They could not have
heard me, surely.  The omnibus was actually moving!

"Hi!" called I, beginning to follow, bag in hand; "wait for me."

"Lamm it on, Jimmy," was the delighted cry from the knifeboard, as a
score of heads craned over to witness the chase.  The spectacle of an
ordinary youth giving chase to an omnibus crowded with roystering
schoolboys is probably amusing enough; but when that youth has his white
collar outside the collar of his great-coat, and wears brilliant tan
boots and a flat-topped billycock, it appears, at least so it seemed to
me, to be exceedingly funny for the people on the omnibus.

"Put it on," called one or two, encouragingly; "you're gaining!"

"Forge ahead, Jimmy; here comes the bogey man!" cried another.

"Whip behind!" suggested a third.

"Anybody got a copper for the poor beggar?" asked a fourth.

By a desperate effort, at last I succeeded in coming up with the runaway
omnibus, when to my disgust I discovered that it was one of those
forbidding vehicles of which the step disappears when the door is
closed.  So that I had nothing to hold on to, still less to climb on to;
and to continue to run with my nose at the door, like a well-trained
carriage dog, suited neither my wind nor my dignity.

So I gave up the chase and dropped behind, covered with dust and
perspiration, amid frantic cheers from the knifeboard and broad grins
from the passengers on the pavement.

In such manner, I, an exhibitioner and a living exponent of the latest
"form," entered Low Heath!  I was almost more grieved for the school
than for myself.  Those fellows on the omnibus evidently didn't know who
I was.  To-morrow, when they found out, and saw me arm-in-arm with
Tempest, they would be sorry for what they had done.

I confess that, as I walked up the steep street, and caught sight at
last of the chimneys of the school peeping up over the trees, I half
wished myself back at home with my mother.  I hadn't expected to feel so
lonely.  I had indeed looked forward to a little pardonable triumph in
being recognised at once as the fellow who had taken the entrance
exhibition, and who evidently knew what was what.  Of course it was
foolish, I told myself, to expect such a thing.  Fellows could hardly be
expected to know who I was until they were told.  Still it was a
little--just a little--disappointing, and I could not help feeling hurt.

I tramped on, till presently I came to the bridge, and loitered for a
moment to rest and watch the boats flitting about below.  There went a
four, smartly manned by youngsters no older than myself.  There lolled a
big fellow in a canoe.  There swished by a senior in a skiff, calling on
the four-oar to get out of the way as he passed.  There, too, stood a
master in flannels, with the Oxford Blue on his straw, talking to a
group of boys.  I wish I could have overheard what they were saying.
Perhaps they were discussing the merits of some of the new boys.

I strolled on, passing on the way inquisitive stragglers who stared hard
at me, till I came to where the road skirts the cricket field.  Here, at
a broken paling, I stood a moment and glanced in.  Fellows were bowling
and batting at the nets, others were strolling arm-in-arm up and down,
hailing new arrivals; others were enjoying a little horseplay; others
were critically examining the last season's pitch; others, impatient of
the seasons, were punting about a brand-new football.

How out of it I was! and yet how sure I felt that if some of those
fellows only guessed who was on the other side of the palings they would
feel interested!

I strolled on farther, and began now to pass the outbuildings.  There
was a lecture room, empty at present.  Should I be there to-morrow?  I
wondered, answering to my name and seeing fellows open their eyes as
they heard it.

There was the gymnasium, I supposed--the place presided over by the
drill master whom Tempest so much detested.  I meant to back Tempest up
in that feud.

Ah, there was the Lion Gate, standing open to receive me.  Little I had
expected, when once before I entered it on my way to examination, that I
should so soon be coming back, so to speak, in triumph like this.

It took some little self-persuasion, I must confess, to feel that it
really was a triumph.  I did think Tempest might have been on the look-
out for me.  I did not know where to go, or of whom to inquire my way.
The boys I met either took no notice of me at all, or else stared so
rudely at my hat and boots that I could not bring myself to accost them.
At length I was beginning to think I had better march boldly to the
first master's house I came to, when, as luck would have it, I stumbled
up against my old travelling companion, who, having safely arrived a
quarter of an hour before, was now prowling about on the look-out for
old acquaintances.

"Please," said I, "would you mind telling me the way to Mr Sharpe's
house?"

"Are you a Sharper then?" he inquired.  "My word! what are we coming to?
Why didn't you come up by the 'bus?"

"I tried to," said I; "you wouldn't stop."

"Jim's horses were a bit shy," said he, with a grin.  "They can't be
held in when they see a moke.  You should have got in quietly, without
their spotting you."

I didn't like this fellow.  He appeared to me to think he was funny when
he was not.

"Do you know if Tempest has come?" said I, hoping to impress him a
little.

"Who?"

"Tempest--Harry Tempest.  He's at Sharpe's too."

"What sort of looking chap is he?" demanded the youth, who, I suspected,
could have told me without any detailed description.

"He's one of the seniors," said I; "he was in the reserve for the Eleven
last term."

"Oh, that lout?  I hope you aren't a pal of his.  That would about
finish you up.  If you want him, you'd better go and look for him.  I
don't know whether every snob in the place has come up or not."

And he departed in chase of a friend whom he had just sighted.

This was depressing.  Not that I believed what he said about Tempest.
But I had hoped that my acquaintance with my old schoolmate would
redound to my own dignity, whereas it seemed to do nothing of the kind.

Presently I encountered a very small boy, of chirpy aspect, whom I
thought I might safely accost.

"I say," said I, "which is Mr Sharpe's house?"

"Over there," said he, pointing to an ivy-covered house at some little
distance higher up the street.  Then, regarding me attentively, he
added, "I say, you'll get in a jolly row if he sees you in that get-up."

"Oh," said I, feeling that the youngster was entitled to an explanation,
"I'm an exhibitioner."

"A who?  All I know is he's down on chaps playing the fool.  You'd
better cut in on the quiet before they bowl you out in that thing," said
he, pointing to my hat.

That thing!  True, I had not observed many hats like it, so far, at Low
Heath; but that was probably because I had not encountered any other
fellow-exhibitioner.  Tempest knew more about the form than this kid.

"Thanks," said I.  "Mr Sharpe will know who I am."

"Oh, all right," said he; "don't say I didn't tell you, that's all."

"I say," said I, feeling that enough had been said on a matter on which
we evidently misunderstood each other, "do you know Tempest?"

"Rather.  He's in our house.  You'll get it pretty hot from him if you
cheek him."

"Oh, I know him well; he's an old chum."

The boy laughed incredulously.

"He'd thank you if he heard you say so.  Oh my! fancy Tempest-- Hullo, I
say, there he is.  Cut away, kid, before he sees you."  And the youth
set me a prompt example.

I was sorry he had not remained to witness the fact that I was not quite
the outsider he took me for.

Tempest was strolling across the road, arm-in-arm with a friend.  He
certainly was not got up in the "form" which he had prescribed for me.
He wore a straw hat on the back of his head, and boots of unmistakable
blackness.  But then, though an exhibitioner himself once, he had now
attained to the dignity of a senior, and was probably exempt from the
laws binding on new boys.

As he approached I crossed the road to meet him, full of joy at the
prospect of encountering at least one friend, and marching under his
protection into my new quarters.  But I was doomed to a slight
disappointment.  For though for a moment, when he looked up, I fancied
he recognised me, he did not discontinue his conversation with his
friend, but drew him out into the middle of the road.  They seemed to be
enjoying a joke between them.  His companion looked round once or twice
at me, but Tempest, who was looking quite flushed, apparently did not
take me in, and walked on, looking the other way.

It was a little shock to me, or would have been had I not remembered his
friendly warning about the etiquette of a junior not accosting a senior
till the senior accosted him.  I wished he had spoken to me, for just
then his help would have been particularly patronising.  As it was, I
was tantalised by seeing him pass by close to me, and yet being unable,
without "shirking form" in a reprehensible way, to bring myself to his
notice.

In due time I reached Mr Sharpe's house.  To my dismay the door stood
wide open, and the hall was crowded with fellows claiming their luggage
as it was being deposited by the railway van.  As I arrived there was an
ominous silence, in the midst of which I stood on the step, and
carefully rung the bell marked, not "servants," but "visitors."  No one
came, so after a due interval, and amid the smiles of the onlookers, I
mustered up resolution to ring again, rather louder.  This time I had
not to wait long.  A person dressed as a sort of butler, very red in the
face, emerged from a green baize door at the end of the passage and
advanced wrathfully.

"Which of you young gents keeps ringing the bell?" demanded he.  "He's
to be made an example of this time.  Oh, it was you, was it?" said he,
catching sight of me.

"Yes," said I.  "Is Mr Sharpe at home?"

"At home?" demanded the official, redder in the face than ever.  "You
seem to be pretty much at home."  Then, apparently struck by my
appearance, he pulled himself up and honoured me with a long stare in
which all the assembled boys joined.

"Who is it?"

"One of the porters from the station, I should say, from the looks of
him," suggested a boy.

"Whoever it is, don't you ring that visitors' bell--do you hear?" said
the man-servant.  "If you want anything, go round to the side door and
don't interfere with the young gentlemen."

"But I'm a new boy," said I.  "I'm--I'm an exhibitioner;" at which there
was a great roar of laughter, which even my self-satisfaction could
hardly construe into jubilation.

I began to have a horrible suspicion that I had committed some great
_faux pas_ by ringing the visitors' bell, and blushed consciously, to
the increased amusement of my fellow "Sharpers."

"Can I see Mr Sharpe?"  I inquired, thinking it best to take the bull
by the horns.

"Can't you wait?" said the servant.  "Do you suppose the master has
nothing to do but run out and see--wild Indians?"  Here followed another
laugh at my expense.  "He'll see you quite soon enough."

Here a shove from behind precipitated me into the bosom of the speaker,
who returned me with thanks, and before I could apologise, into the
hands of the sender.  Thence I found myself passed on by a side impetus
to a knot of juveniles, who, not requiring my presence, passed me on to
a senior standing by, who shot me back to a friend, who sent me forward
among the boxes into the arms of the matron, who indignantly hustled me
up the passage, where finally I pulled up short in the grasp of a
gentleman who at that moment emerged from the green baize door.

In the confusion I had lost both my hat and my presence of mind.  I was
far too confused to observe who the new-comer was, and far too indignant
to care.  All that I called to my mind as I reeled into his clutches was
Tempest's directions about kicking back, which accordingly I proceeded
to do, with all the vigour of which my new tan boots were capable.

Mr Sharpe suffered this assault meekly for a second or two, then he
held me out stiffly at arm's length, like a puppy in a fit, and
demanded,--

"What do you mean, sir, by behaving like this?"

I was bound to admit that it was a natural inquiry from a person whose
shins had been considerably barked by my new boots.  I felt as if I owed
Mr Sharpe an apology.

"Please," said I, "I didn't mean to do it.  The boys shoved me, and I
didn't know where I was going, really, sir."

Mr Sharpe seemed inclined to believe me.  He was a florid-looking,
spectacled young man, with sandy whiskers, and a grip--oh that grip!--
that could have lifted me easily over the Lion Gate.

"Boys," said he, "let us have none of this nonsense, or I must set a
house theme.  Is Mrs Smiley here?"

Mrs Smiley, looking anything but the "moral" of her name, appeared in
due course.

"Mrs Smiley, will you please take charge of this new boy and keep him
out of trouble?  Run away with Mrs Smiley, my little man; and you,
boys, as soon as you have claimed your boxes, clear out till register
bell."

What I did my ears deceive me?  Was I, an exhibitioner, a scholar who
had come up to Low Heath in all the _eclat_ of the latest "form," the
friend of Tempest, the fellow who had made things too hot for himself at
Dangerfield--was I, I say, to be handed over to a sort of washer-womanly
person to be kept out of mischief, and called "my little man" in the
presence of the whole house?  Was this my triumphant entry then?

No sooner had Mr Sharpe retired, than greetings of "My little man,"
"Spiteful Sarah," "Run along with his Smiley, then," beset me on all
sides.  I would fain have explained and corrected any wrong impression,
but they only laughed when I tried; finally, when Mrs Smiley grabbed at
my hand and walked me off the scene like a baby, my humiliation was
complete.

Mrs Smiley, who was far too busy with the young gentlemen's luggage to
relish the extra duty put upon her by Mr Sharpe, had a very summary way
of dealing with cases of my kind.

"Sit down there, and don't move till you're told," said she, pointing to
a little three-legged stool in a corner in the box-room.

"But--" began I.

"Hold your tongue; how dare you speak to me?" she retorted.

"I only--"

"Stand in the corner, with your hands behind you, for disobedience,"
said she.

This was getting serious.  The little three-legged stool would not have
been exactly luxurious; but to be stood in the corner with my hands
behind me by a person of the feminine gender called Smiley, was really
too bad.  The worst of it was that if I made any further protest I might
be smacked in addition, and that possibility I hardly dared risk.

So, rather to my own surprise, I found myself standing in the corner,
with my hands at my back, scrutinising a blue and pink rose on the wall-
paper, and wondering whether it would not be worth my while to write to
the _Times_ about the whole business.  I could not help thinking that
Mrs Smiley did not hurry herself on my account.  I was conscious of box
after box being dragged to the front, emptied of its contents and put
back, to be removed presently by a porter, who probably looked at me
every time he came in, but, I am bound to say, received very little
encouragement from my studiously averted head.

After nearly an hour I began to get tired, and the blood of the Joneses
began to rise within me.  I was seriously meditating mutiny, or at least
a definite explanation with Mrs Smiley, when at last she broke silence.

"Now, young gentleman, this way, please."

And she led me to a small comfortable-looking apartment, which I
surmised to be her particular sanctum.

"What's your name?"

"Jones," said I.

"Ah--you're the boy who's brought down a rubbishy speckled waistcoat and
loud striped shirts--eh?"

"Well, yes," said I.

"Did your mother buy them for you, or did you buy them?"

"I did."

"I can see your mother's a lady by the way she has everything else done.
You'll find your own trash just where you put it, in the bottom of your
trunk.  You will not be allowed to wear it.  We expect our boys to dress
like young gentlemen, whether they are such or not.  What's that in your
hand, Jones?"

"My hat," said I, hoping I was coming in for a little credit at last.

"Hat!"  Here she was rude enough to laugh.  "What made you bring a thing
like that here for a hat?"

"But," said I, "I'm an exhibitioner."

"All the more shame on you not dressing like a gentleman.  Look at those
boots; I am sure your mother did not buy them for you.  Take them off at
once, sir--and put on your proper ones."

"Aren't they--isn't it the thing, the form, you know, for--"

"Form!  Fiddlesticks.  The thing at Low Heath is to behave and dress
like gentlemen, not like vulgar, public-house potmen," said she, with an
access of indignation which surprised me.  "To think that you, with a
nice mother like yours, should come up here a fright like that!  There,
put the shoes and hat in the trunk with the speckled waistcoat and
shirts, and get yourself up decently, and then I'll speak to you."

I was under the impression she _had_ spoken to me--pretty strongly too.
This, then, was the end of my elaborately prepared toilet!

A horrid suspicion began to come over me at last, not only that Tempest
had been having a little joke at my expense, but that I had lent myself
to it with an alacrity and eagerness which had almost--nay, very nearly
wholly--been ridiculous.

What does the reader think?

My further conversation with good Mrs Smiley, after I had, to use her
own expression, made myself decent, only tended to confirm the painful
impression.  I even went to the length of adding, of my own accord, my
six-button lavender gloves to the pile of sacrificed finery which
strewed the bottom of my trunk.  And when in due time a bell rang, and
Mrs Smiley said, "There now, go down to call-over, and don't be a silly
any more," I obeyed with a meekness and diffidence of which I could
hardly have believed myself capable, had I not been quite sure of the
fact.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

TEMPEST TALKS TO ME LIKE A FATHER.

As I entered the hall, in which were already assembled most of my fellow
"Sharpers," the first idea which occurred to me was that Low Heath was
not such a big place after all.  I had expected to encounter the whole
school, instead of some fifty boys of my own particular house, and it
was a relief to me to find that, for the present at any rate, I was to
blush before only a limited company.

The next thing that struck me was that these fellows evinced wonderfully
little interest in my appearance; which, considering the active interest
they had shown in me not long since, was quite a shock.  I had made up
my mind to be howled at and laughed out of countenance.  Instead of
which they contented themselves with a half-glance to see who the new-
comer was, and then went on talking together as if nothing had happened.

The conceit was already sufficiently knocked out of me to enable me to
take this indifference in good part.  Possibly when my name was called
reference would be made to my exhibition, which would make a few of them
look twice at me; but for the present I was glad to be left alone.

At first I could distinguish nobody; but in a little I caught sight of
Tempest's head among the seniors of the house.  He did not see me, nor
did he appear to be looking out for me.

Suddenly some one called "Seats!" an order that was so promptly obeyed
that it left me standing alone near the door at which I had entered.

"Seats--can't you hear?" said some one near me.  I made promptly for the
first empty desk I could see.  The youth at the end of the row had his
back partly turned, and it was necessary to push vigorously past him to
arrive at my destination.

"Look out, you mule!" said he; "you trod on my-- Hullo, Sarah, how are
you?" and a friendly kick on the shins helped me wonderfully on my way.

It was my old acquaintance of the railway carriage; and next to him was
the small youth who had been so terribly concerned about my costume in
the morning.

He put his feet up on the desk in front, and gave me the option of
climbing over or crawling under.  He was about three-quarters my size;
but he had such an air of authority about him, that I hardly liked to
suggest a third alternative, namely, that he should put down his feet
and let me pass.  So I climbed over, much to his indignation (which he
expressed by sticking a nib into me as I passed).

"I say," he began, "you'll catch it.  That's not your desk."

I was aware of that, and devoutly hoped the real owner would not arrive
on the scene.

"If Tinker kotches you-- Hullo, what _have_ you done with your patent
boots?"

"I've changed them," said I; "but do you think Tinker's coming?"

"We'll keep him out if he does--"

Just then one of the seniors on the front form, who had been talking to
Tempest, leant back, and said in a loud whisper to the boy at the end of
the form in front of ours--

"White, see all the new kids have their gloves on properly."

Gloves?  I felt my teeth begin to chatter in my head.

Had I not flung my gloves along with my hat and boots into my trunk,
thinking they would not be needed?  I had considered them as part of
Tempest's little joke.  But evidently I had made a fearful mistake.  For
the senior who had given the admonition was not Tempest at all, but his
next neighbour; and the fact that it was not given to me but to a
monitor made it clear that, however I had been humbugged over the other
details of "form," gloves were the order of the day for new boys at
first call-over.

In a panic I rose and tried to go out, with the wild idea of rescuing my
gloves from my trunk.  But it was impossible to escape.  Not only had my
companion his feet up more uncompromisingly than ever, but my sudden
movement called down upon me general remarks.

"Shut up! sit down, can't you?" said my neighbour.  "What are you up
to?"

"My gloves--I've--I've left them upstairs."

"Your what?"

"Gloves.  I thought it was a mistake about new boys having to wear them,
and didn't bring them."

The boy looked grave.

"Oh, you'll catch it!  You can't go now.  There's Sharpe coming in.
Haven't you got any at all?"

"Only my ordinary gloves."

"What colour?"

"Yellow."

"Stick them on then."

"But they've only two buttons."

"Can't be helped.  You're bound to catch it, but they're better than
nothing."

So, in dire agitation, I drew on my new dog-skin gloves.  The smiles of
the boys near me I interpreted as a grim recognition that I had "shirked
form" and did not know any better.  I longed to explain that I did, and
that I had not come to Low Heath as ignorant as they supposed.  But it
was impossible.  Mr Sharpe was already in his place, and "register" had
begun.

Register, a ceremony with which I was destined to become painfully
familiar in time, consisted in the calling over of the names of all the
boys in the house, in order of place, by the minor prefect, who took his
stand at the side of the master's desk for the purpose.  Instead of
answering "Here" or "Adsum," in the usual way, the boy whose name was
called stood in his place and held up his hand.

I had been so preoccupied with the lack of my six-button lavender gloves
and the remarks of my two left-hand neighbours, that I had failed
altogether to observe the boy on my right, who now quietly nudged me,
and presented to my astonished gaze the serene and serious countenance
of Dicky Brown.

"What have you got your gloves on for?" inquired he, as if he had seen
me daily since we parted.

"It's the form.  Haven't you got any?  I say, you'll get in a jolly
row," said I, quite delighted to be able to lord it a little over an
inferior.

"Why--who told you?"

"Tempest."

"Tempest's a regular humbug.  He tried to stuff me up by making me bring
a cheese-cutter cap.  But I wasn't such a fool as I look."

Alas! it was my turn to colour up.  Had Dicky, I wondered, seen my
square billycock?

At that moment Tempest's name was called, and we saw our old Dux rise
complacently in his seat and hold up his hand.

It was difficult to feel angry with him.  He looked so cool and
determined, his shoulders were so square, and the year that had elapsed
since we met had added three good inches to his stature.  It was a
feather in a fellow's cap to know Tempest, even if he did have his
little joke at one's expense now and then.

I came to the conclusion that Dicky and I must be the only two new boys
in the house, for none of the numerous hands, grimy and otherwise, which
went up were cased in anything but their native skin.

Presently the register clerk came to an end of his list, and I was
beginning to congratulate both myself and Brown on our probable escape
from detection when Mr Sharpe said--

"New boys, come forward."

My left-hand neighbour interposed no obstruction now, as, followed by
Dicky, I sidled out of my place and advanced along with five other
youths to the front.  I was conscious of smiles as I went past the
desks, some of recognition of the late owner of the tan boots, some of
appreciation of my blushes, and others, as I supposed, of the greenness
which had led all my companions to commit the fatal error of not
appearing in gloves, and of my error, though in a smaller degree, of
appearing in bright yellow two-button goods instead of lavender of the
regulation half-dozen.

I exchanged glances with Tempest, among others, who looked very serious,
and was evidently chagrined that after all his kind trouble on my behalf
I should now land myself in this dilemma.  Good old Tempest!  It wasn't
his fault.

"Answer to your--" began Mr Sharpe, when, suddenly catching sight of
me, he said--

"Why, sir, what nonsense is this?  What do you mean by wearing those
gloves?"

"I beg your pardon, sir," I faltered, and felt that not a word of my
speech was being lost by the assembled house; "I've left my lavender
six-button gloves in my trunk."

Mr Sharpe's mouth curled at the corner in a curious way, and a general
titter greeted my explanation from the benches behind.

I was fully convinced now that, after all my care, the very solecism I
had planned so carefully to avoid had tripped me up at last.

"Take them off at once, sir, and let me have no more of this
foolishness.  You are making a bad start.  Were you not the boy I had to
speak to in the hall this afternoon?"

"Yes, sir.  I am sorry I kicked your shins.  I hope I didn't hurt much.
I thought you were one of the boys."

I am sure I meant no harm by it, but he seemed to regard this as a
studied insult, and visited me with his wrath not only for it but for
the smiles from the boys behind which accompanied it.

"What is this boy's name?" he inquired severely, looking round.

I wondered who would answer the question; it was evidently not intended
for me.  It astonished me that Mr Sharpe should not apply at
headquarters; I am sure I could have told him.  "I think," said a voice
which I recognised as Tempest's, "his name is Jones, sir."

Think!  Surely Tempest might have had a little more confidence than
that.

"Perhaps you will see what you can make of him presently, Tempest.  If
he has any intelligence at all," (nice, wasn't it, for an exhibitioner?)
"you may be able to make him understand some of the rules of the place.
If not, I am afraid we shall have to put him down as a silly little boy,
and bear with him accordingly.  Go to your seat now, sir, and report
yourself to Tempest after register."

It was not a very dignified end to the interview.  Still, I felt myself
lucky to be handed over to the tender mercies of my old comrade, and
retired to my place a puzzled but not an amused boy.

What perplexed me most was to notice that Brown and the other new boys
who had no gloves at all, and did nothing but answer the questions put
to them in the plainest possible way, not only passed muster, but
received words of approval and encouragement from the master such as I
would have given a great deal to have got myself.  But such is life.
The fellows who take the most pains and deserve most, get least; and the
fellows who have least to boast of receive more than they expect.

I was glad when register was over and the time came for me to have an
explanation with Tempest.

"Look here," said the candid youth next to me, "you'd better sit up when
you go to Tempest, I can let you know.  He's cock of our house this
term, and he's not over-tender with idiots, I can let you know."

"What, has he been down on you?"  I inquired meekly.

The only reply I got was a touch on the calf which made me exclaim "Oh!"
rather more loudly than I should have chosen to do under ordinary
circumstances.  Luckily the general movement of the class somewhat
deadened the sound, and if Mr Sharpe heard me, he did not consider it
worth his while to deprive Tempest of the task of elucidating the reason
of it.

I kept my man carefully in view, and followed him upstairs into a little
study about the size of a commodious sentry box, with a window, book-
case, sofa, table, chairs, and all the requirements of a single man of
few needs.  It seemed to me a delightful little sanctum; and for a
moment I began to wonder whether, being an exhibitioner, I might not be
entitled to one like it for myself--perhaps this _was_ mine.

Tempest soon disabused me of that notion.

"Light the fire, and stick on my kettle, kid," said he--they were the
first words after more than a year--"and cut and get us a muffin from
the shop."

"I say," said I, longing for rather more cordial a recognition, "I am
jolly glad to see you again, Tempest."

Just then another senior popped his head in.

"Have tea with me.  Tempest?  Come on, Wales is coming too."

"Is Crofter coming?"

"No."

"All right, I'm on; thanks, Pridgin.  Blow that fire out, kid."

"Is that kid your fag?"

"Not likely."

"Is he all there?  Sharpe seemed to doubt it."

Tempest shrugged his shoulders.

"How soon?  Ten minutes?"

"Yes--not longer."

"Now, kid," said Tempest, when we were left alone, "how long are you
going to play the fool?  Take your time; but let us know when you've
done, that's all."

"Really, I'm not fooling; I know I ought to have had on the lavender--"

Tempest laughed.  A jolly laugh it was, though it frequently preceded a
licking.

"You mean to say you sucked in all that rot?  I thought I'd just see how
far you'd let yourself be humbugged; I'm sorry I didn't tell you to
stand on your head.  I don't doubt you'd have done it."

I had painful reason to think he might be right.

"Why, even Dicky Brown was too old a bird for that sort of chaff," said
Tempest; "he twigged it at once--and he's a day boy.  Hand me that cane
out of the cricket box, there's a good fellow, and hold out your hand.
Don't yell; only muffs do that."

"What?"  I exclaimed, "am I to be licked, Dux?"

"Don't call me Dux here.  Yes, rather--three on each hand."

"But Mr Sharpe only said--"

"Sharpe--what's he got to do with it?  Come on, look alive, or I shall
be late for tea."

I could barely be angry with him.  He didn't seem to be able to see the
matter from my point of view at all, and was so genuinely friendly with
it all.

"The third will be a hot one," said he, as I held out my hand; "but I
don't want to break the cane--it's a good one."

The third _was_ a hot one.

"Hurt you much?" said Tempest, carefully examining his weapon.

"Middling," said I.

"Now the other hand.  I suppose you've not got to know many chaps yet?
Did you get any cricket in the vac.?"

"No," said I, extending my left in a deprecating way.

"We did," said he.  "We were jolly near licking--"

"Ow!"

"Feel that much?  Good cane, isn't it?  Now the other two will be easy."

To do him justice they were, or would have been had they not fallen
uncomfortably near the site of the first.

"Stick the cane back," said he,--"and look here," he added in the old
friendly way which always captivated me, "if you'll take any advice
you'll drop playing the fool.  It may be funny, but it doesn't pay.
Fellows get bored by it."

"But I really--"

"I know you can't help it.  Your best dodge is to lie low for a bit, and
keep out of everybody's way."

"I never meant--"

"Of course you didn't.  You can't help being an ass, but don't swagger
or brag about it.  Go easy--and, by the way, whatever you do, forget
you're an exhibitioner.  It's not your fault, I know, but it's a sort of
thing to be lived down up here.  Be nobody, that's the rule! then you'll
worry through."

"But _you_ were an exhibitioner, Tempest," I suggested, "weren't you?"

"Yes, but I kept it dark.  Do you know the chap who asked me to tea?"

"No."

"He's Pridgin--in the Eleven--makes beastly bad jokes, but not a bad
chap.  You'll like fagging for him."

"What--am I to fag?" said I, undergoing another shock.  I had made quite
sure exhibitioners were exempt from that indignity.

"There you go again.  What did I tell you?" said Tempest, in tones of
mild menace; "you're putting it on again already.  You'd better fish out
that cane again, there's a good chap."

"Oh, please don't--I didn't mean, Tempest!  All right, I'll fag for
him."

Tempest regarded first me, then the cricket box where the cane lay,
doubtfully.

"I tell you he's not half a bad chap.  Bother it," added he, picking up
the cane, "I must do it, kid.  Awfully sorry, but it would be low to let
you off because I know you.  Look alive.  One, middling warm, on each
hand, that's all.  Thanks."

He was quite unnecessarily grateful.  His idea of middling warm, I could
not help thinking, was not very different from hot.  And yet I felt I
could stand it better from him than from most.

"Some chaps," said he, after returning me the cane to put back in its
place, "would say that this sort of thing pained them more than it does
you.  It didn't me.  I fancy you felt it more than I did.  Anyhow,
you'll remember what I said, won't you?  Pridgin's not half a bad chap."

"If you want any one to fag for you.  Tempest--"

I began.

"Oh, I've got one--a beauty--young Trimble; he sat next to you at
register to-day.  You'll hit it off with him to a T.  Talking of tea, by
the way, it's time we showed up at Pridgin's.  Come along, and I'll
introduce you."

The reader may not believe it, but my interview with Tempest helped to
knock the nonsense out of me more than any treatment I had yet
undergone.  It was not so much the caning (which, by the way, I
afterwards discovered to be a wholly unauthorised proceeding on my old
comrade's part), but his plain advice, and the friendly way in which it
was all given.  It made me realise that he really meant to stick by me
and pull me through my troubles, and the sense of his interest in me
made up wonderfully for the loneliness which had been growing on me ever
since I entered Low Heath that morning.

Pridgin, as became a member of the Eleven, received me with dignity
quite devoid of curiosity.  He informed Tempest that he considered it
was playing it pretty low down on him to let an idiot like me loose on
him.  Still, times were bad, and one must put up with what one could
get.

Whereat I had the good sense to grin appreciatively, and was thereupon
permitted to boil my new master's eggs and stand by the kettle until it
was ready for the tea.



CHAPTER NINE.

ACQUAINTANCES, HIGH AND LOW.

I was at first too much concerned in my important culinary occupations
to bestow much attention on the company.  It was only when the eggs were
boiled and the teapot filled that I had leisure to make a few
observations.

The host, Pridgin, my new master, was not a very formidable sort of
person at first blush.  True he was in the Eleven and a fine all-round
athlete.  True he was fairly well up in the Sixth, and one of the boys
Low Heath was proud of.  These things did not strike one in beholding
him.  What did strike one was his air of lazy humour, which seemed to
regard life as a huge joke, if only one could summon up the energy to
enjoy it.  Pridgin did indeed enjoy his share of it, but one could not
help feeling that, were he to choose, that share would be a great deal
larger than it really was.

It was plain to see he was fond of Tempest; a weakness which reconciled
me to him from the first.  Tempest, however, seemed, if anything, to
prefer the third member of the party present, who was in every way a
contrast to his genial host.

Wales struck one as a far more imposing person than Pridgin, but not
quite as attractive.  He was dressed in what seemed to me the top of the
fashion, and had the appearance of a youth who made a point of having
everything of the best.  He had the reputation, as I discovered
afterwards, of possessing the most expensive bats and racquets, the
best-bound books, the best-fitting clothes, of any one in Low Heath.  It
was also rumoured that he spent more than any boy in the town shops, and
gave the most extravagant entertainments in his study.  Fellows were a
little shy of him for this very reason.  He forced the pace in the
matter of money, and there were only a few fellows who could stand it.

Tempest was not one of these, and yet he seemed very thick with Wales.
It was certainly not for the sake of his money, for Tempest was one of
those fellows who never care for a fellow for the same reason that any
one else would.  He had begun by being amused with Wales's dandyism and
extravagance, and had ended in encouraging him in them.

"I expect," said Wales, as the three heroes sat discussing their tea,
"we're in for a pretty lively term, if it's true what I hear, that
Redwood is to be captain."

"Why shouldn't he be?" asked Pridgin; "he's a hot man in the fields, as
well as in classics."

"My dear fellow, he's a town-boy."

"What of that?"

"What of that?  First of all, the town-boys are most of them snobs.
Sons of hard-up people who come to live at Low Heath so as to get them
into the school cheap.  Then they can't possibly keep up with what goes
on in school when they are away every evening."

"There's more in the second objection than the first," said Tempest.  "I
don't see why a fellow should be out of it because he's poor.  If so, I
can cut my lucky here.  But it does seem a swindle to stick a town-boy
over all of us."

"I don't see it," said Pridgin.  "He's one of us.  The only difference
is, he goes home to sleep instead of tucking up in a cubicle here.  No,
what seems to me the cool thing is this talk of a town-boys' club, that
brags it's going to lick the school clubs into fits.  I hope it's not
true, for if it is, we shall have to sit up, and I loathe sitting up."

His guests laughed.  It was notorious that Pridgin when he did bring
himself to "sit up" was a person worth reckoning with.

"For the matter of that," said Wales, "Redwood's not likely to trouble
himself much.  He'll take all the glory and do none of the work.  The
captain of Low Heath ought to have his hand in everything, and not let
everything slide."

"You'll find Redwood can be awkward enough when he chooses.  You can
never tell how far he'll let things go on.  But when his back once gets
up he'll stiffen pretty hard."

"All I can say is," said Tempest, "if I'm to be cock of this house this
term--and I've no right to be--"

"Yes, you have, old chap," said Pridgin.

"You know you purposely ran for second place last term, so as to get out
of the fag of cocking the house," retorted his friend.  "Anyhow, if I
_am_ to be cock, I mean to stand up for our rights, and see we're not
done out of them by town-boys, of all people."

"Hear, hear," said Pridgin; "stick up for your rights.  I don't exactly
know what rights we're got more than any other Low Heathens, but stick
up for them certainly.  Nothing like having a grievance, if you can only
find one."

"What do you say to Jarman for one?" said Wales.

The faces of all three clouded at the mention of this name.

"Ah, I'd forgotten about that.  Is it true he's to be a sort of general
discipline master, and have the right of pulling up any fellow, senior
or junior, without even saying a word to his house prefects?"

"He won't do it here, if I can help," said Tempest, with a frown.

"Well, have some more tea," said Pridgin, "before you begin operations.
Here, kid, make a fresh brew, sharp, and then cut."

What I had heard had been quite enough to satisfy me that things were
not running altogether smoothly at Low Heath, and that Tempest was not
beginning his new duties as head of his house in the best of tempers.  I
confess I felt a little uneasy.  For I knew my old chief's impulsive,
generous nature well enough to be sure that he might easily get himself
into trouble for the sake of other people.  His friends were evidently
glad enough to let him fight their battles, but were not likely, at
least so it seemed to me, to take much trouble to help him through with
them.

I was wandering rather disconsolately down the passage when it occurred
to me I did not know what I was expected to do or where I was expected
to go.

I therefore ventured to accost a senior who was lounging about at the
head of the stairs.

"If you please," said I, "I'm a new boy--can you tell me where to go?"

The senior, a bland, good-looking sort of youth, surveyed me carefully
and replied--

"To bed, I should say."

"All right, thanks," said I; "which way is that?"

He laughed pleasantly.

"What's your name?"

"Thomas Jones."

"You needn't mind about the Thomas up here.  Where have you come from?"

"Do you mean, where do I live, or where have I been just now?"  I
inquired, anxious to avoid any misunderstanding.

"Look here," said he, "hadn't you better take a seat, if you want to
tell me all your family history?  I'm sure it's very interesting, but
it's rather late in the day to begin now.  Where have you come from, not
originally, but just now?"

I flushed up very much at this polite rebuke.  Whatever made every one
so anxious to assume that I was an ass?

"Pridgin's," said I.  "I'm his fag, and he's having a tea party."

"Oh," said the youth; "who's there?"

"Only Tempest and Wales," I replied, feeling more at my ease.

"No one else?"

"No," I answered.  Then, guessing he might have the same antipathies as
Tempest, I volunteered--

"Crofter's not asked."

My companion opened his eyes.  "Indeed--why?"

"I don't know.  Only I know Tempest wouldn't have gone if he had been.
Please which way do I go?"

"What objection has Tempest to Crofter?"

"I don't know--I suppose he's a beast.  Tempest hates beasts."

The boy laughed.

"He must be very fond of you," said he.

"Yes," said I, "we're old chums; we were at Dangerfield together, and
both got ex--"

There I was, after Tempest's warning about keeping my exhibition dark.

"Both got what?  _Expelled_?" inquired the senior, with interest.

"Well--yes," said I, thinking that the best way of getting out of it.
"It was this way--"

"Really, Jones, it's getting late," said the senior; "I've no doubt it's
an interesting story.  There, go and inquire in the fourth room on the
left.  They'll show you the way to bed."

And he departed.

I was very sorry he had not given me time to explain the little matter
at Dangerfield.  It would be a pity for any one to get a wrong
impression about it.  Still, what a lucky escape I had had from blabbing
about my exhibition!  The fellow, too, seemed a nice sort of chap, and
disposed to be friendly, so there was no harm done after all.

I could tell, long before I reached it, that the room which had been
indicated to me as the place where I might get the information for which
I thirsted was, to say the least, inhabited--for the noise which
penetrated through the keyhole and the cracks of the door was appalling.
Either, thought I, a free fight is going on within, or there is a steam
engine at work, or the builders are shooting bricks through the window.
I was mistaken.  It was only five boys of about my age talking.

The silence which greeted my appearance was rather more formidable than
the noise which had preceded it.  In the midst of it, however, I
observed the form of Master Trimble, also that of my travelling
companion of the morning, and concluded therefore that I had come to the
right place for information.

"Full up! cut!" was the cordial greeting of the company generally.

"Hullo, it's Sarah!" cried my travelling companion.  "What a lark!
Collar him, you chaps.  That's the idiot I was telling about.  He came
down in the train with his ma--"

"She wasn't," said I; "she was no relation."

A loud laugh greeted this disclaimer.

"Well, his nurse, or aunt, or washerwoman, or something."

"No, she wasn't."

"Shut up, and don't tell crams."

"It's _you_ who are telling crams," said I, for the blood of the Joneses
was getting up.

"Look here; do you mean to call me a crammer?" demanded the speaker,
looking very imposing.

"If you say it again I will," said I.  "I tell you that woman had no
more to do with me than you; there!"

It was a critical situation, and the key to it was in my accuser's
hands.  If he insisted that the lady in question had anything to do with
me, I was committed to call him a crammer.  And if I called him a
crammer, he was equally committed by all tradition to punch my head.
And in the humour I was then in, he was not likely to do that without
getting one back for himself.

"I know who it was," suddenly cried Trimble; "of course!  Tempest told
me last term there was a young ass coming up who'd been at a girls'
school, and had got an exhibition or something.  Of course this was his
old school dame.  Good old Sarah!"

At this terrific exposure the spirit leaked out of me.  My tell-tale
blushes confirmed what was true in the story, and my silence lent
countenance to what was untrue.  The delight of my tormentors was beyond
words.  They danced the "mulberry bush" round me, overwhelmed me with
endearing expressions, offered me fans and smelling salts and cushions
and hairpins, simulated hysterics and spasms, trod on my skirts, and
conversed to me in shrill treble till I was sick of the business.  Only
one course was open to me.  It was an unpleasant one, but on it
depended, I felt, my future welfare at Low Heath.

I seized the nearest, who happened to be Master Trimble, and pulling him
gently but firmly by the nose, demanded if girls generally treated him
that way?  He kicked vigorously, and ordered me to release the
imprisoned member.  I declined to do so until I had kicked back, and
finally deposited him on the floor, amidst the laughter of his
perfidious comrades, who told him it served him right, and that "Sarah"
was evidently one too many for him.

This little protest stood me in good stead.  It put an end to all direct
aspersions on my sex, although it was a long while before I was destined
to hear the last of delicate insinuations on the topic.  And it advanced
me very considerably in favour with the four whose noses I had not been
fortunate enough to engage.

"Look here; stop fooling, you chaps," said one of them, when in due time
Master Trimble was permitted to regain his feet.  "This new kid had
better make up our sixth man here.  No other faggery would be likely to
take him, so we may as well."

I concluded from this remark that the juniors of Mr Sharpe's house were
permitted to herd together in half dozens; and on the whole I was
disposed rather to bear the ills I had than fly to others I knew not of.

"I don't mind," said I, "if you let me be."

"Who wants to touch you with a pair of tongs?  You may as well pull in
with us, and help us kick the others.  It'll be a change after the
girls' school."

"I _wasn't_ at a girls' school," said I, "I told you.  All I did was to
coach with one of the teachers."

"About the same thing, I fancy," said Trimble, blowing his outraged nose
somewhat defiantly, "Sarah!"

"If you call me Sarah again," said I hotly, "I'll pull your nose again."

"All right: Miss Jones, then."

"No, not Miss; just Jones."

"All serene, just Jones, then shut up; stick on your lavender gloves,
and keep your hair on."

There was a general laugh at this which vastly solaced the aggrieved
Trimble, and encouraged him to refer jocularly to my late hat and boots,
topics which I had not the spirit to resent.

As soon as these personal matters were disposed of, I was tacitly
admitted as a member of the honourable faggery, and invited to express
my opinion on a matter which had been engaging the attention of the
fraternity before I arrived.

"We were thinking," said my late travelling companion, whom his friends
addressed as Langrish, "that it would be a score to get up a
Philosophical Society in the school.  What do you say?"

"What to do?"  I ventured to ask.

"Oh, discussions, and picnics, and larks.  What do you suppose we
_should_ do?  There's a senior club of the kind already.  They go in for
dry rot--science and history, and that sort of thing.  Awful slow, and
nobody knows what he's talking about.  I flatter myself _we_ should."

"We ought to draw up some rules, oughtn't we?" said Trimble.

"Rather--forge ahead."

Whereupon we crowded solemnly round the small table and put our heads
together.

One of the party, by the way, answering to the name of Purkis, appeared
to be the leading spirit, and made the most valuable suggestions.

"Rule 1," dictated he, "That this club be called the Low Heathen
Conversation Club."

"Hold on," said Trimble; "you've got club coming twice in the same
sentence.  Bad grammar."

"Besides, I thought there was to be something about philosophy,"
suggested Langrish.

"And keeping out the day cads," said Warminster, another of the party.

"Of course, if you make the rule long enough," said Purkis, with lofty
contempt, "you can get something in it about the man in the moon."

"But," said I, thinking to make a little joke, just to show I had no
ill-feeling, "we don't want him in the club, do we?"

"No," said Langrish, who had evidently been on the look-out for his
chance; "no more do we want pretty Sarah's washerwoman; do we, you
chaps?"

I subsided gracefully.  The time was not yet ripe, evidently, for me to
assert myself.

"I tell you what," said Warminster; "what's the use of every one making
each rule?  Let old Purkis make the first, and I'll make the second, and
Langrish the third, and so on.  It will be ever so much quicker, and
give each chap a fair innings."

It seemed a good idea, and as it allowed Purkis's rule to stand
unchallenged, he acquiesced.

So in due time the following wonderful code of rules was drawn up and
adopted--

1.  That this club be called the Low Heath Conversation Club.  (Purkis.)

2.  That the object of the club be and are periodical picnics and
meetings for the discussion of philosophy, etcetera.  (Warminster.)

There was some debate as to whether the ninth word should be "is" or
"are."  But "are," as agreeing with the plural, was carried by a large
majority.

3.  That each member bring his own grub, _alias_ provisions.  (Trimble.)

4.  That no day boy be eligible on to the club.  (Langrish.)

5.  That any member breaking the rules is hereby expelled.  (Coxhead.)

6.  That the subscription be two shillings a term, payable in advance.
(Jones.)

Warminster was anxious for consistency's sake to add the words "and are"
after "be," but was overruled.

After which we honourably drew lots for the various posts of emolument
and honour in connection with the club.

To my surprise I was drawn for president.  At first I was disposed to
disclaim the honour on account of my youth and inexperience.  But my
fellow-Philosophers assured me that was no excuse, and that my name
would undoubtedly "draw."  I did not exactly see how, but they were
probably better judges than I; and perhaps as an exhib--

No, I was bound to keep that dark.  At any rate, it would be a nice
thing to be able to write home to my mother, that on the day of my
arrival I had been appointed president of the Philosophical Conversation
Club, with a right to add the initials P.L.H.C.C. after my name.  It
sounded well, and would give me a better footing in Low Heath than my
tan boots.

Langrish was drawn for treasurer, and Purkis for secretary; while, to
obviate any cause for jealousy, Trimble was selected as auditor,
Warminster as librarian, and Coxhead as registrar.

A levy of subscriptions was made forthwith by the treasurer, and the
secretary was ordered to expend part of the amount in a handbill setting
forth the object and _personnel_ of the society, for distribution
through the school.  The auditor undertook to check the printer's bill,
the librarian to keep a copy of the document among the archives of the
club, and the registrar to prepare a book for entering the names of the
new members.  Altogether it was a most businesslike proceeding, and one
which reflected, as it seemed to me, great credit on the young life of
Low Heath.

After this, a peremptory summons from the bell dismissed us
precipitately to bed.  I had the indignity of being conducted to my
cubicle by Mrs Smiley, who had the bad taste to adjure me in the
hearing of my comrades to behave myself like a good boy and go to sleep
directly the lights were out.  This was not altogether easy, for my
cubicle happened to be between those of Trimble and Langrish, and the
partitions were not particularly high.  I was, indeed, allowed to
undress and say my prayers without interference, which was more than I
had hoped for.  But no sooner was I in bed, and lights out, than I was
favoured with all sorts of missiles pitched over the partitions on
either side with extraordinary accuracy.  A book from Langrish hit me on
the ear, and a wet sponge from Trimble moistened my cheek.  And when I
sought shelter under the sheets, the butt-end of a fishing-rod in the
ribs drew me from my hiding-place, and a clever cast with a hooked pin
by Langrish relieved me of my outer covering altogether.  The footsteps
of the monitor on duty deprived me of the privilege of making an audible
protest.  All I could do was to send Trimble's sponge quietly over to
Langrish, and Langrish's book across to Trimble, and, as well as I was
able, recover my abstracted sheet with the aid of the rod.  It took a
long time, and laid me open to dire penalties for disturbing the public
peace.  But it had to be done, and fortunately for me a row at the other
end of the room called the monitor away in the nick of time.

When he returned, all was still, and I was dreaming that Mr Evans was
selling a pair of second-hand six-buttoned lavender gloves to my mother
in the hall of Mr Sharpe's house.



CHAPTER TEN.

SPECIAL SERVICE.

My introduction to Low Heath at large next day turned out to be a far
less formidable affair than I had anticipated.  I had long since given
up the notion that the whole school would rise at my appearance and
salute me.  I had even ceased to expect that they would all stare and
make remarks.  But I was hardly prepared for the absolute indifference
with which I was permitted to answer to my name at "Great register."
Not a soul took any notice of me, even when Dr England explained to me
publicly that as there were already three other Joneses in the School, I
would please answer in future to the title of Jones iv., which I humbly
promised to do.  Brown, I was not sorry to hear, was to be designated as
Brown iii. for similar reasons.

The ceremony being over, the new boys were trooped up to the head
master's library, and there told off to their respective forms with a
few words of warning and encouragement.  It surprised me that, in spite
of my scholastic honours, I was entered in the same form as Brown.  But
on the whole I was more pleased than disappointed, for I loved my old
comrade dearly, and after all, if he _was_ placed above his merits, it
wasn't his fault.

"It's a pity you aren't a day boy," said he, as he walked across
afterwards; "we could have larks together."

"It's a pity you aren't in the school," said I.

"Oh, our chaps say it's rather stale to be in the school.  I don't see
why your fellows should be looked down on, but they are."

"Pooh! you should hear our chaps talk about the day boys.  Do you know,
Dicky, I'm president of a club, a Philosophical Club; and day boys
aren't eligible.  I'm awfully sorry; I should have liked to have you
in."

"That's just what I thought about the Urbans.  They don't let in any
fellow who's in the school--only day boys--they're obliged to draw the
line somewhere, you know.  Do you know Redwood, the captain, is a senior
Urban?"

"I know.  Our chaps say it's a soak for the school having a day boy for
captain."

"Oh!  _We_ don't think so!  I say, do you see that chap there?"

The youth at whom he pointed was the friendly senior of whom I had
inquired the way to bed last night.

"Rather; he's a Sharper.  Why, and what about him?"

"He's a hot man, they say, and the most popular chap at Low Heath.  He's
captain of the Rifles."

"What's his name?  Do you know?"

"Crofts, or Crofter, or something like that.  What's up?"

He might well ask!

"Crofter!" exclaimed I.  "My word, Dicky, I've been and done it!"

"Done what?"

"Why, I called him a beast yesterday."

"You did?  You're getting on, Jones iv."

"No, without humbug, I did.  I didn't know it was Crofter, and I told
him Tempest thought he was a beast."

"If Tempest says so, he probably is," remarked the unemotional Dicky.

"But what's to become of me?  How was I to know?"

"I don't know.  Perhaps you'd better go and tell him you were mistaken."

"I don't like to.  I say, what a downer he'll have on me!  I half wish I
was a day boy, after all."

"It's a pity you aren't.  We've a jolly lot in the Urban Minors; quite a
literary lot."

"Bother the Urban Minors!" said I, looking dismally after the retreating
form of Crofter.

"It'll take you all your time to bother some of them.  There's Flitwick,
he's--"

"Hang Flitwick!  Whatever am I to do, Dicky?"

"I wouldn't advise you to hang Flitwick.  Oh, about that fellow Crofter!
Oh, it'll be all right.  He's plenty else to think about."

It was poor comfort, but the best I could get, and our arrival at our
class room cut short further discussion on this most unfortunate
incident.

But it weighed on my mind all day.  When class was over, I was summoned
by my fellow "Philosophers" to come out into the playing fields; I went
in fear and trembling, lest I should encounter Crofter.  But he was
nowhere to be seen.

My companions were evidently hand and glove with most of the juniors in
the school, and I was favoured with a bewildering number of
introductions, not always of the most gratifying kind.

"What have you got there, Trim?  A tame monkey?" asked one gorgeous
youth, whose cap bore the badge of Mr Selkirk's house.

"Not exactly," said Trimble; "haven't had time to tame him yet."

"What's his name?"

"Sarah.  Allow me.  Muskett--Sarah Jones; Jones--Silly Muskett.  Now you
know one another."

"He's only fooling about my name," said I; "it's Thomas."

"Oh, is it?  Delighted to see you, Sarah Thomas."

And before I could put him right he was off, and I was led away by my
rejoicing comrades.

"Look here, Trimble," said I, "it's time you knew my name by now."

Trimble laughed, as did the others.  They all thought it was high time.

But everybody we met I was introduced to as Sarah.

"Awfully sorry," said Langrish, after the fourth or fifth offence.
"I've such a bad memory for names.--Well kicked, sir."

This exclamation was addressed, not to me, but to a senior who had just
appeared on the scene, and was kicking about the practice football with
a friend prior to a match which was evidently due.

It was a splendid kick, and the author of it was a splendid fellow--
brawny of limb and light of foot, with fair hair and clear blue eyes--as
one might picture one of the Norsemen of the story-books.  You could see
by the way he moved, and the spirit he put even into this practice
kicking, that he was a sportsman every inch of him; and his good-natured
laugh, as he exchanged greetings with this and that arriving friend,
proclaimed him, even before you heard him speak, as good a gentleman as
he was an athlete.

"Redwood's in form to-day," said some one.  "We'd better stop and see
the play."

"Is that Redwood, the captain?" inquired I, in an awestruck way, of
Warminster.

"Rather," was the reply, in a tone of pride which convinced me that Low
Heath was proud of its chief, even though he had the misfortune to be a
day boy.

Just then Redwood turned and waved his hand to somebody near us.

"Look out; he wants you," said Langrish.

"Me?" said I, flabbergasted.

"Don't you see him beckoning?  Look alive, or you'll catch it."

I could hardly believe it; and yet everybody near looked round at me in
apparent wonder at my delay.

Perhaps Redwood had heard something about me from Tempest and wanted
to--

"Go on," said Trimble, giving me a shove.  "If he wants to stick you in
the Fifteen, tell him it's not good enough."

"Look sharp," called the others, encouragingly, as I started to obey the
summons.

By this time Redwood was strolling our way.  Mahomet, thought I, is
coming to the mountain.  So, to save him trouble, I trotted up to meet
him.

At first he didn't notice me.  Then when I said, "Did you want me?" he
stared me over from head to foot as a Newfoundland dog would inspect a
pug.  It was on the whole a benevolent stare, not unmingled with humour;
especially when the cheers of my late comrades called his attention to
my ingenuous blushes.

"I didn't," said he; "but you'll do, if you don't mind.  Cut home to my
house.  Number 3, Bridge Street, and ask them to send my leather belt.
Look alive, there's a good chap."

This speech, the first really polite speech I had heard since I entered
Low Heath, took me by storm, and captivated me at once to the service of
the captain of the school.  I galloped off, as proud as a non-
commissioned officer who has been sent to fetch his regimental flag on
to the field of battle.  The chaps behind might cheer and jeer and cry,
"Gee-up, Sarah!" and "Mad dog!" as much as they liked.  They would have
been only too proud to be sent on my errand.

It was a good ten minutes' run to Bridge Street, and I was fairly out of
breath when I rang at the bell of Number 3.  It seemed a long time
before any one came, and I was beginning to be afraid I should forfeit
the reputation I hoped to acquire, when hurried footsteps announced that
my ring had been heard.

Mrs Redwood was out, said the servant, and she had been down the garden
with the children.

When I delivered my message, she asked me to wait; and with her little
charges evidently on her mind, ran upstairs to fetch the belt.

It was a nice house, although a small one.  The garden door was open,
and gave a beautiful peep over the little sloping lawn to the river and
the woods beyond.  I was not sure that, after all, a town-boy might not
have a good time of it, living in a place like this, instead of in
school.

Suddenly my reflections were disturbed by a shrill scream from the
garden, followed by a little girl of five or six crying--

"Annie, Annie!  Mamie's tumbled in; Mamie's tumbled in!"

For a wonder I had my wits about me, and divined the truth at once.
With a bound I was down the steps and across the lawn, half knocking
down the panic-stricken little messenger on the way, and at the river's
edge, floundering piteously in about two feet of water, found the
unfortunate little Mamie--evidently a twin-sister--more frightened than
hurt, but perilously near to getting into deep water.

Her yells redoubled when she found herself grabbed by the sash by a
stranger, and lugged most unceremoniously on to _terra firma_.

Scarcely had I achieved this gallant rescue, without even wetting my own
shoes, when Annie, as white as a sheet, came flying on to the scene.

"It's all right," said I; "she's not hurt."

Whereupon Annie most inconsiderately leaned up against a post, clapped
her hands to her heart, and went or threatened to go off into hysterics.
And there was I, a poor unprotected male, left to face the squalling of
two infant female children and a full-grown female nurserymaid!

"Look here," said I, appealingly, "Mamie's soaking wet.  You'd better
take her and dry her, before she gets her death of cold."

This appeal had the desired effect.  It stopped the nurse's spasms and
let loose her tongue.

"Oh dear, oh my!  And I told her not to go through the gate.  Oh, you
naughty girl you; and you.  Miss Gwen, for letting her do it.  Come in
directly, you little hussies!"

It struck me as grossly unfair of Annie; but I did not venture in her
present state of mind to protest, for fear she should call me hussy too.
I followed indoors, somewhat guiltily, at the tail of the procession,
feeling myself in a very unpleasant situation, in which I would not on
any account be caught by Redwood's mother or by Redwood himself.  To my
delight, on the floor of the hall, where Annie had dropped it, lay the
belt, at which I sprang greedily, and not waiting to say thank you, or
put in a word for the doomed infants, which would have been quite
inaudible in the volume of Annie's philippics, I saved myself (as the
Frenchman says), and ran at racing speed with my prize back to the
school field.

To my mortification I found the match had just begun, and it would be
impossible to deliver my missive till half-time.  What would the captain
think of me?  Would he suspect me of having dawdled to buy sweets, or
look over the bridge, or gossip with a chum?  I would not for anything
it had happened, and felt not at all amiably disposed to Miss Mamie, as
the inconsiderate cause of my delay.

However, there was nothing for it but to wait.  I resolved not to put
myself into the clutches of the Philosophers till my mission was
discharged, for fear of accident; so I seated myself on one of the
pavilion steps and watched the play.

It was evidently a hot match for a scratch one.  As far as I could make
out, the remnants of last season's Fifteen, amounting to eleven veterans
only, were playing the next Fifteen, who, having the best of the wind,
were giving a dangerously good account of themselves.  They were acute
enough to make all the use they could of the favouring element by
keeping open order and kicking whenever they had the chance, whereas of
course the other side played a tight game, and ran with the ball.  Even
for a novice like myself, it was interesting to watch a contest of this
kind.  The Fifteen evidently hoped to rush the thing and carry their
goal before half-time deprived them of the wind, whereas the Eleven were
mainly concerned to keep on the defensive and risk nothing by over-
haste.

Among the veterans I could distinguish the big form of Redwood, always
close to the ball, and near him with a shudder I recognised Crofter
working hard, while hovering on the wing of the scrimmage was the genial
Pridgin, looking as if he would fain be in bed, but, when the time for
action came, making it very uncomfortable for the enemy.  On the other
side I was not long in finding out Tempest, with the glow of enthusiasm
on his cheek as now and again he broke through the ruck and sent the
ball into quarters.  Wales, too, was there, spick and span as usual,
playing neatly and effectively, and withal elegantly.

As time wore on it was evident the veterans were being penned closer and
closer by their antagonists.  Presently a dangerous scrimmage was formed
just in front of their goal.  For some minutes the ball was invisible,
then by an apparently preconcerted movement the forwards of the Fifteen
loosened and let it dart back into the open behind them, where lurked
Tempest ready to receive it.  He did not wait to pick it up, but ran to
meet it with a flying kick.  For a moment it seemed doubtful whether it
would clear the onward rush of Redwood and his forwards.  But it did,
and rose steadily and beautifully over their heads, and with the wind
straight upon it, reached the goal and skimmed over the bar, amid the
loud shouts of every one, conspicuous among which was my shrill voice.

Half-time!  Now was my chance; and before the shouting had ceased, or
the discomfited Eleven had quite realised their misfortune, I darted
into the sacred enclosure, and presented the captain with his belt.

"I'm awfully sorry I wasn't in time," said I.  "You'd just begun when I
got back."

"Thanks, youngster, it's all right," said Redwood, wonderfully cheerful,
as it seemed to me; "here, take care of this for me," and he divested
himself of the belt he was wearing and donned the new one.

"You'll have the wind with you now," I ventured to observe.

"Yes," said he with a nod, "I think we shall do the trick this time,
eh?"

"Rather," said I; and departed elated, not so much to have been spared
the rebuke I expected, but to be talked to by such a hero, as if I was
not a junior at all, but a comrade.

My chums when I rejoined them were anxious to prevent my being too much
puffed up by my exploit.

"Good old Sarah Toady," cried Trimble, as I approached.  "Is he coming?"

"Who?  Where?"  I inquired.

"I thought you were asking Redwood to tea or something."

"No, I wasn't--I only--"

"There's Jarman," cried Langrish.  "Run and cadge up to him.  Perhaps
he'll pat you on the back too."

Despite these taunts I could not fail to notice the depressing effect of
the new arrival on the onlookers generally.  Mr Jarman, the gymnasium
master, was a ruddy, restless-looking man of about thirty-five, with
cold grey eyes, and the air of a man who knew he was unpopular, but was
resolved to do his duty nevertheless.  If I had heard nothing about him
before, I should have disliked him at first glance, and instinctively
tried to avoid his eye.  And yet, as he stood there, talking to Mr
Selkirk, the melancholy master of the reputedly "fast" house at Low
Heath, he did not look particularly offensive.

"Look out now; they're starting again."

There was no mistaking the veterans now.  Their backs were up, and the
order had evidently gone out for no quarter to be given to the audacious
Fifteen.

Redwood's kick off all but carried the goal from the middle of the
field, and from that moment it never got out of the "thirties," as the
imaginary line between the two distance flags was called.  To Crofter
belonged the honour of first wiping off scores with the enemy.  And
after him Redwood dropped a goal, first from one side line, then from
the other.  Pridgin, too, scored a smart run in; but, unluckily, the
kick fouled the goal post and saved the Fifteen a further disaster then.
But before time was called a fourth goal was placed to the credit of
the veterans.  The vanquished fought gamely to the end.  Once or twice
Tempest broke away, but for want of effective backing was repulsed.  And
once a smart piece of dribbling down the touch line by Wales gave the
Eleven's half-backs an anxious moment.  But that was all.  The match
ended, as every one expected, in a slashing victory for the old hands,
together with a general verdict that Tempest and Wales, at any rate, had
won their laurels and were safe for two of the vacant caps.

In the stampede which followed I missed my opportunity of restoring
Redwood's property, as he vanished immediately after the game, and my
comrades would by no means allow me out of their sight.  Indeed, it was
not till after evening chapel that I contrived to elude their vigilance
and start on my second run to Bridge Street.

But if I eluded them I was less fortunate with another sentinel.  For at
the gates I encountered the forbidding presence of Mr Jarman.

"What are you doing here?"

"Please, sir, this is Redwood's belt, and I promised to give it to him."

"Go back.  What is your name?"

"Jones, sir."

"Whose house are you in?"

"Mr Sharpe's."

"Do not let me find you out of bounds again, Jones."

And he fixed me with his eye as if to impress me with the fact that he
would certainly know me again.

"But, sir, Redwood--"

"Did you hear me, sir?"

I capitulated, cowed and indignant.  I was beginning to understand what
the fellows said about Mr Jarman.

"It's all rot," said the Philosophers, when I confided my grievance to
them; "it's not out of bounds before 6:30--and if it was, it's no
business of his.  It's the house master's business, or the house
captain's.  If you get lagged by them, all right; but _he's_ got no
right to lag fellows, the cad."

In my present humour I was far from disputing the appellation.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

CHEAP ADVERTISING EXTRAORDINARY.

I spent a bad quarter of an hour that evening before bed-time in
inditing a letter of "explanation" to Crofter.  I had come to the
conclusion this would be easier and safer than a personal interview, and
that the sooner it was done the better.  How to do it was another
problem.  To write a letter in the raggery was out of the question.  I
tried it, but failed miserably.  For either my paper was twitched away
from under my pen, or some one looked over my shoulder and pretended to
read expressions of endearment which were not there, or some one got
under the table and heaved it about tempestuously to the detriment of my
handwriting, or some one drew skeleton figures of spider-legged bipeds
on the margin of the paper.  Worse still, it was evident every word I
wrote would be common property, which I did not desire.  I had therefore
to abandon the attempt till later on; when, finding myself in Pridgin's
study, I ventured to inquire if I might write there.

Pridgin was good enough to express admiration of my cheek, but said if I
spread one newspaper over his carpet and another over his table-cloth to
catch the blots, and didn't ask him how to spell any word of less than
four letters, or borrow a stamp, I might.

All which I faithfully undertook to do, and sat down to my delicate
task.  It took me a long time, considering the result, and I was by no
means satisfied with the performance when it was done.

"Dear Crofter," I wrote; but that seemed too familiar, whereas "Dear
Sir" from one schoolfellow to another was too formal.  So I attempted my
explanation in the "oblique oration":--

"Jones iv. is sorry he accidentally told Crofter he was a beast
yesterday.  He did not know it was him when he saw him, or he would not
have told him what Tempest said about him, which was quite
unintentional.  He also must explain that what he said about his being
expelled was in consequence of a dog's death, about which there was a
misunderstanding.  He hopes Crofter will not tell him he told him, as he
would be very angry with him."

"Done?" said Pridgin, who, comfortably ensconced in his easy-chair with
his feet upon the window-ledge, was reading a comic paper.

"Yes, thanks," said I, half terrified lest he should demand to read my
not too lucid epistle.

"All right.  Go and tell Crofter I want him, will you?  Look alive, and
then cut to bed."

Here was a blow!  I had been at all this labour in order to avoid the
painful necessity of an interview with Crofter, and here I was as badly
off as ever.

"Can't you hear?" said Pridgin as I hesitated.

"If you please, Pridgin," said I, resolved to take the bull by the
horns, "I'm awfully sorry, but I don't want Crofter to catch me.  The
fact is--"

Pridgin's good-humoured reply was to shy a book at me, which I was
fortunate enough to miss, but which Tempest, who entered the study at
the moment, caught fairly on his forehead.

"Hullo!  Are you and the kid playing catch?" said he.  "Sorry to disturb
you, really; but my fag's skulking somewhere, and I want to borrow yours
to take a message to Crofter."

"Was it a plot, or what?  I had far better have written in the faggery
after all."

"That was exactly the subject about which the kid and I were playing
catch just now," said Pridgin.  "I asked him to go to Crofter too."

"What, has he been sending you a _billet-doux_?" said Tempest.

"Well, yes.  He seems to be sore I didn't ask him to tea yesterday, and
says he's afraid some one has been libelling him, though how he knew I
had any one here last night I can't imagine."

"That's funny," said Tempest; "he writes to me to say he is sorry I
should take the trouble to call him a beast in public.  He understands a
fellow's right to his private opinion, he says, and would be sorry not
to be allowed his about me, but he thinks it imprudent to shout it out
for every one to hear.  Just his style."

"I was going to send him word to ask him to come in and make himself a
cup of tea out of my pot, just to show there was no ill-feeling," said
Pridgin.

"And I was going to say that I hope he won't trouble to think better of
me in private then I think of him in public.  Though for the life of me
I can't imagine what he refers to."

"The fact is.  Tempest," said Pridgin, putting his feet up on the
window-ledge again, "it's just as well to be above board with Crofter.
He's a slippery customer, and if he knows what we think of him, and we
know what he thinks of us, we shall get on much better."

"If he'd only give a chap a chance of a row with him," said Tempest;
"but he won't.  The more down on him you are, the more affectionate he
is, and the sweeter he smiles.  Ugh!"

"But who on earth has been blabbing to him?" said Pridgin; "not Wales?"

"Wales?" said Tempest; "rather not.  He's not that sort."

"I don't think he is," said Pridgin; "and yet, old man--the fact is--
I--"

"You don't fancy Wales, I know."

"Hardly that.  I don't mind him; but he's more of a pull over you than
he has over me.  I can't be bothered with his fashions.  It's too much
grind.  But you aren't lazy like me, and--well--you know he runs you
into a lot of expense.  That picnic last term, for instance.  We could
have had quite a jolly day for half the cost.  Chicken and ham's all
very well, but cold boiled eggs are just as good for keeping a chap
going."

"But Wales can't stand things not being--"

"Dear!" said Pridgin.  "Don't flare up, old chap.  You've got your work
cut out for you this term, and can't afford to spend all your time
paying bills, even if you had the tin."

"All very well for you who've let me in for cocking the house," said
Tempest, with a laugh.  "Anyhow, you've a right to talk to me like a
father.  All the same, I fancy you've a little downer on old Wales.
He's a good sort of chap, and there's nothing of the eel about him."

"Which brings us back to Crofter," said Pridgin.  "Some one has told him
that he's not popular in this study, and he doesn't like it.  I wonder
who our candid friend is."

"It was me," said I, coming out at last with my pent-up confession.
"I'm awfully sorry, Tempest.  It was this--"

"Take a seat," said Tempest, putting me off in the identical way that
Crofter had done yesterday.  But I was not to be put off; I took a seat
and continued--

"I met him and didn't know who he was, and I mentioned that I'd come
from here, and that a tea was going on, and that Crofter was out of it,
and the reason was because Tempest thought him a beast.  And--I'm
awfully sorry, Tempest--I let out to him that we'd been expelled from
Dangerfield, and I'd not the least idea it was him."

"He," suggested Pridgin.

"He; and I've just been writing to him to explain."

"Rather a tough job, eh?" said Tempest.

"You may see the letter," said I.

The two seniors read it with a gravity which scarcely seemed genuine.

"I think it may pass," said Tempest, coming out at last with a laugh.
"There are only about twelve 'he's' and 'him's' in it, and as it will be
absolutely unintelligible it can't possibly do harm."

"If Crofter has the least sense of literary taste, he will frame it,"
said Pridgin.  "I trust no dogs' deaths will occur here."

My confusion was tempered by the relief I felt that they took my
indiscretion in such good part, and saw only--what I failed to see
myself--the humorous side of the incident.

I begged hard to be allowed to tear up my letter, but this they would by
no means allow.  On the contrary, I was compelled to address it and
stamp it then and there, and place it in the post-box in the hall.
Then, with compliments and good wishes, I was dismissed to bed, and left
the two friends talking school politics.

I felt a good deal more humbled by the manner in which they had received
my confession than if they had, as I had expected, roundly abused me.
To be let down easy, as if I was barely responsible for my actions, was
not conducive to my vanity; and if that was the object they had in view,
it was amply attained.  I went to bed on my second night at Low Heath
with as little vanity in me as I could decently do with; and even that,
as I lay awake for an hour or two, oozed away, and did not return till
in a happy moment I fell asleep, and once more, and for a few
unconscious hours, became a hero to myself.

The next morning I tumbled out of bed at the call of the bell in no very
light-hearted way.  First of all, Crofter would receive my letter;
secondly, I had still got Redwood's belt; thirdly, I had not done my
preparation; and fourthly, I felt concerned about Tempest and his
alliance with the expensive Wales.  Strangely enough, this last trouble
weighed on me most as I dressed.

Tempest, I knew, was not well off.  But he was proud, and not the sort
of fellow to shirk a thing on account of the cost.  I could remember at
Dangerfield his spending all his money at the beginning of the term on
an absurdly expensive cricket bag, and having to go without spikes in
his shoes because he could not afford a set.  At Low Heath, where
seniors were allowed to run up bills in certain shops, I was certain his
ignorance about money matters, added to the friendly encouragements of
an exquisite like Wales, would make it all the worse for him.  Why, even
_I_ knew more about money than he did, and could reckon that if I
brought thirteen shillings up at the beginning of the term, I should
have just a shilling a week to bless myself with till break-up.  Whereas
he, I verily believe, would consider that he had thirteen shillings a
week.  And the worst of it was he would never let any one know how hard
up he was, or tolerate any remarks, except from a privileged chum like
Pridgin, on the subject.

As I joined my comrades in the faggery, in the fond hope of snatching a
precious quarter of an hour for my neglected studies, I found great
excitement and jubilation afoot.  The printer had sent home the
handbills of the Conversation Club.

"That ought to do our business," said Langrish, flourishing one of the
documents in my face.

I took it, and read it with mingled pride and concern.  It ran as
follows:--

Under the distinguished Patronage of the Nobility and Gentry of Low
Heath:

*A Philosophical Conversation Club* has been started for conversation on
Philosophy, Picnics, and Cross-country Runs.  Meetings weekly; to be
announced.  Subscription: Two shillings in advance; every member to find
himself.  No town-boys or masters eligible.  "Come in your hundreds!!!
No questions asked.  Evening dress or flannels.  The Inaugural Picnic
next week.  Particulars on receipt of subscription.  No connection with
any other so-called club in Low Heath!  For further particulars apply to
the following:

  Sarah Jones, Esquire, Pr.Ph.C.C, President.
  Ted Langrish, Esquire, S.Ph.C.C, Secretary.
  Wilfred Trimble, Esquire, T.Ph.C.C, Treasurer.
  Jos.  Warminster, Esquire, L.Ph.C.C, Librarian.
  Tom Coxhead, Esquire, A.Ph.C.C, Auditor.
  Michael Purkis, Esquire, R.Ph.C.C, Registrar.

P.S.--As the membership is strictly limited to 500, early application is
advised.  No eligible cash offer refused!  Our motto is "_Mens sano in
corpore sanae_."

I naturally bridled up at the record of my own name.

"Look here," said I; "you've stuck it down wrong again."

"Awfully sorry," said Langrish; "the printer chaps made a little slip
over the Christian name, but all the rest seems right.  It's wonderful
how sharp they are, isn't it?"

"But you're going to have it corrected, surely?" said I.

"Why, it would cost a frightful lot!" protested the company.  "We might
alter it in ink, but that would only call attention to it.  Bless you,
no one will notice it.  They'll put it down to a printer's error."

I was by no means satisfied, but their delight at the whole performance
was so unbounded that it was impossible to be as angry as I felt.

"It'll draw, and no mistake," said Trimble, who had evidently never seen
his name in print before.  "Jolly well drawn up of you, Lang."

"Oh," said Langrish modestly, "when you know what you want to say, it's
easy enough to stick it down."

"That's why you stuck down 'Sarah,' I suppose," said I, rather crossly.

"I never knew such a kid as you," retorted Langrish; "you seem to fancy
nobody can think of anything but you and your washerwoman."

The conversation was drifting on to dangerous ground, and Warminster
promptly changed the subject.

"The thing now will be to put the papers about.  I vote we each take a
batch and give them round."

"We might shove them under the fellows' doors," said Coxhead.

"The best way will be to do it in Big Hall," said the more practical
Purkis.  "One or two of us can easily get in ten minutes early, and
stick one on every chap's place."

"But suppose you stick one on a day boy's place?"  I suggested.

"What's the odds? the paper tells him he's out of it," replied Purkis.

It occurred to me that this would not cheer the day boy very much;
still, on the whole, Purkis's suggestion seemed the best.

"I tell you what," said Langrish, "I beg to move and second that the
President be authorised to stick round the papers."

"I third and fourth that," said Trimble.

"Carried unanimously," said Langrish.

"Look here, one of you had better do it," said I, feeling a little
alarmed at this imposing honour; "you know the way better."

"That's where you've the pull," said Purkis; "you're a new kid, they
won't interfere with you.  Big Hall's at five, and you can easily slide
in at a quarter to, and do the trick.  Hullo, there's bell."

School that morning went uncomfortably for me.  I escaped being "lagged"
for my neglect of preparation, chiefly owing to the friendly prompting I
received from Dicky Brown.  But it was a time of anxiety and
trepidation, and my nerves were somewhat strained before it was over.

The shock of the day, however, awaited me as I got outside on my way to
the fields.

A small youth of my own size accosted me.

"I say, are you the new chap?"

"What new chap?"

"The new chap that Redwood told to fetch his belt."

"Yes," said I, turning a little pale.

"All right.  You've got to go to him, sharp."

"I tried to give it him back yesterday, really I did; but I was
stopped," said I.  "Do you think I'll get in a row?"

"I wouldn't be in your shoes, that's all I know," remarked the messenger
brutally.  "It'll be all the worse if you don't cut."

"Where is he?"

"In the captain's room at the School House."

I went off with my heart in my boots.  And I had hoped so much to show
up well to Redwood!  It was all Jarman's fault, and I wrote down yet
another grudge against him in my mental book.

The captain was alone, and evidently expecting me, as he rose and came
to meet me when I appeared.

"Here you are, then, youngster," said he, in a tone which, if it meant a
licking, was a very deceptive one.

"I'm very sorry," said I; "I tried to bring the belt round yesterday
evening, but--"

"Hang the belt!" said the captain.  "That's not what I want you for.
Why didn't you tell me what happened at home yesterday afternoon?"

Then it was another row altogether I was in for!  What, I wondered, had
I done!  Surely he didn't suspect me of having pushed his young sister
into the water?

"I didn't like, while the match was on.  I didn't know Mamie had tumbled
in, or I would have stopped her."

"But you fished her out?" he asked.

"I told Annie to take her and dry her," said I, wondering where the blow
was going to fall.  "You see, she went upstairs for the belt, and it was
when she had gone it happened.  I don't think it was her fault."

To my amazement Redwood laughed and clapped me on the back.

"You young donkey, don't you know you saved Mamie's life, and I want to
say 'Thank you,' to you?"

This unexpected _denouement_ alarmed me almost as much as my previous
misgivings.

"Oh no, really I didn't," said I; "she was close to the edge."

"Another inch or two and she would have been in six feet of water," said
he.  Then, with a friendly laugh, he added--

"You may not have meant to save her life; but you did, and must take the
consequences.  My mother wants you to come to tea to-morrow.  Call here
for me after evening chapel, and we'll go together.  Good-bye now, and
thanks, youngster."

I could hardly tell if I was on my head or my heels as I walked back.
It had never occurred to me till now that I had done anything out of the
common in fishing Miss Mamie out of her muddy bath.  Indeed, I still
felt I was getting credit I did not deserve, and blushed to myself.  As
to the invitation for to-morrow, that seemed to me a burst of glory
quite past my present comprehension, and I resolved to treasure it as a
secret in my own bosom until at least I had made sure it was not a
dream.

Before then, however, I had less pleasant work on hand.  My comrades did
not fail to remind me several times during the afternoon of my
"promise," as they called it, to distribute the Conversation Club
circulars in Great Hall, and adjured me not to run it too fine.  The
consequence was that, at a quarter to five, I was convoyed, with the
bundle of papers under my arm, to the door of the dining-hall, and
gently shoved inside, with all retreat cut off until my task was done.

Some of the servants who were laying the tables objected to my presence,
but on my explaining I had been sent to do it, they allowed me without
interruption to lay a copy of the precious document on each of the five
hundred plates.  I had barely concluded this arduous duty when the bell
commenced to ring, and the fellows in twos and threes began to drop in.
It was all I could do to affect unconsciousness, as from a modest
retreat near the door I marked the effect of the announcement on Low
Heath generally.  At first there was a note of surprise; then, as one
after another read on, a titter, and finally a general laugh, which was
only checked by the entrance of the masters and the call to grace.

I had--being a stranger to the place--distributed my favours among the
masters quite as liberally as among the boys, and presently, with
horror, perceived Dr England rise in his place with his copy in his
hand.

"Whew!" whistled Langrish, "there's a row on, I fancy."

"Serve you right if there is," said Trimble.  "Why ever did you put them
on _that_ table?"

"How was I to know?" groaned I.

"What boy," said the doctor, when silence prevailed, "what boy has been
putting this foolish paper round the hall?"

Oh dear!  How I wished I was safe at home!

"Please, sir, I did," said I, rising meekly in my place.

"Your name?"

"Jones iv., please, sir."

"Then come at once, Jones iv., and collect them again, every one, and
write out two hundred lines.  Let dinner proceed now."

If the object of the promoters of the Philosophical Conversation Club
had been cheap advertisement, they must have been amply gratified.
Hercules never performed any labour equal to mine that afternoon.  The
masters handed me up their copies gravely and reproachfully; but the Low
Heathens generally made sport of my misery.  Scarcely one in ten would
part with his rare broadside, and those who did made it manifest that
they had the contents by heart.  The unfortunate "misprint" of my
Christian name, moreover, was the occasion for much ribald comment.

When, finally, I reached the quarters of my own particular comrades, I
received more kicks than papers.  They were unkind enough to say I had
mulled the whole thing, and to promise me untold penalties when they got
me in the privacy of the faggery.

At last, when the pudding was almost vanishing, I sat down to my hard-
earned meal.  But it mattered little, for I could have eaten nothing.

Be that as it may, the Philosophical Conversation Club was able to boast
that afternoon that it had attracted the attention and interest of every
member of the school, from the headmaster down to the junior fag.  And
few school clubs can boast as much as that!



CHAPTER TWELVE.

A COMMITTEE OF WAYS AND MEANS.

"Where are you going?" demanded the faggery next afternoon, as I tried
to desert them after afternoon chapel.  "To take up your lines to
England?"

I should have preferred that they had not asked me the question, but
having asked it I felt bound to answer.

"No; I'm going to tea at a fellow's."

"Who?  The washerwoman's?"

"No; to Redwood's."

I tried to pronounce the name with the unconcern of a man who is in
daily communion with heroes, but I fear I betrayed my emotion.  At
least, their laughter made me think so.

I was instantly greeted with all sorts of mock salutations and
obeisances, and, whether I liked it or not, rushed off to the faggery to
be tidied up.  It was in vain I struggled, and explained that Redwood
was waiting for me.  They would not be put off.

"You must wash your face for the credit of the Ph.C.C," said Langrish.

"And put on a clean shirt for the credit of your wash--"

Here by a frantic effort I broke loose and made off, followed by the
pack in full cry, with shouts of--

"Stop thief!"

"Welsher?"

"Clear the course!"  "Hurry up for tea there!" and other exclamations of
a similar nature.

It was not certainly a very dignified way of accepting a friend's
invitation; still, it would have been worse had I remained in their
clutches.

As it was, I only just made the schoolhouse door before Warminster and
Coxhead were up to me, and presented myself to my host painfully out of
breath and red in the face.

"Been having a trot over?" said he, with a nod.

"Yes, a little," I gasped.

"I'm ready; come along."

My heart sunk within me, as, on reaching the door, I saw my five
comrades, all apparently by accident, hovering round to see me go out.
They did their best, and very successfully too, to stare me out of
countenance, and encourage my blushes by allusions to "Sarah" and my tin
sleeve-links, and the smudges on my face, and by cries of "shrimps" and
"muffins," and other awkward allusions.

Redwood, as became the cock of the school, affected not to hear their
ribald remarks, though he must have caught a word or two, and
inquired,--

"Been playing football since you came?"

"No, not yet," said I, painfully aware that Trimble and Langrish were
walking behind us critically; "that is, yes, a little."

I was glad when we reached the big gates, and were able to shake off the
enemy, who continued audible comments till I was out of earshot, and
finally went off on some new quest.

At Number 3, Bridge Street, I found myself, much to my discomfort, quite
a hero.  Mrs Redwood, a gentle-looking lady, kissed me effusively, so
did little Miss Gwen, who having once begun could scarcely be prevailed
upon to leave off.  The servants smiled approvingly, as did a lady
visitor, who shook me by the hand.  The only person who did not appear
to rejoice to see me was the heroine of the occasion, Miss Mamie, who
declined altogether to kiss me, and added I was a naughty big boy to
spoil her nice sash, and ought to be sent to bed.

To her mother's protests and brother's encouragement she was quite
obdurate.  No; she hated me, she said, for spoiling her nice sash, and
wild horses would not draw from her a contrary declaration.

After which we were summoned to tea, and I was consoled for this base
ingratitude by plum jam and "sally-lunn" and sultana cake and other
delicacies, which only a schoolboy, well on in the term, knows how fully
to appreciate.

The talk was limited; first because I made it a rule not to talk with my
mouth full, and secondly, because, had that difficulty been removed, I
had nothing to say.  Redwood, fine fellow that he was, did not try to
pump me, and the ladies, who kept up most of the talk, most conveniently
worded their observations in such a form as not to call for a reply.

After tea, however, I did find myself talking to Mrs Redwood about my
mother, and presently to Redwood about Dangerfield and my previous
acquaintance with Tempest and Brown.

"Brown iii. is a town-boy," said the captain.  "I wish we'd had him in.
Is he a member of your wonderful club, by the way?"

I blushed.  Of course Redwood had seen that fatal document yesterday!

"Ah--well, you know, that is only for chaps in the school."

"Rather rough on us town-boys," said Redwood, with a laugh.

"I'm sure they'd be delighted to have you," said I.

"Ah, well, our fellows have a club of their own," said he, "although
they don't talk philosophy.  By the way, is your Christian name
correctly printed?" asked he.

"Oh, no," said I; "that was Languish's fault.  He says it was a
printer's error, but I'm sure he did it on purpose."

"It helps to call attention to the club," said the captain, laughing.
"Your lot seems to be fond of its little joke, to judge by the specimens
that came to see us off just now."

"I'm awfully sorry," said I; "they do fool about so--I say, I hope you
aren't in a wax about it."

He certainly did not look it.

I went up with him to his den, and we had quite a long talk, and somehow
without seeming to mean it, he managed to knock a great deal of nonsense
out of my head, and incite me to put my back into the work of the term.

"I suppose," said he, "you mean to back up Tempest now he's cock of
Sharpe's?  You kids can make it pretty hot in a house if you choose."

"Oh, we're all backing up Tempest," said I, "especially now he's got his
colours."

"All serene," said the captain; "he'll pull through well, then."

I stayed till it was time for Redwood to go over to the school for a
committee of the Sports Club.  I did not leave Number 3 without a
standing invitation to come in whenever I liked, or without painful
apologies for the contumacy of Mamie.

Redwood and I had just reached the bridge when some one confronted us
whom I recognised at once as Mr Jarman.

"Ah, Redwood, you've a meeting on.  Who's this boy?  Ah, I remember--
Jones iv.  What did I say to you yesterday, Jones?"

"Jones has been to tea at my house," said the captain, with a flush, and
looking less amiable than I had yet seen him.

"It's after hours," said Mr Jarman, coolly.  "I cautioned him
yesterday.  A hundred lines, Jones iv., by to-morrow evening."

"It's not his fault," said Redwood; "I gave him leave, sir."

"We need not discuss this, Redwood," said Mr Jarman, and walked away.

I felt quite sufficiently avenged when I saw the captain's face.  He
strode on some distance in silence, and then said,--

"I'm sorry, youngster.  It can't be helped, though.  Jarman's strictly
in the right, though it's sharp practice.  You'd better cut in now.
Good night."

"Good night," said I, making off.  But he called me back.

"You'd better do the doctor's lines to-night.  Leave Jarman's till the
morning."

"All right."

And I departed, not a little impressed with the incident.

The captain had disappointed me a little.  I should have liked to see
him knock Jarman down, or at least openly defy him; whereas he seemed to
back him up, although much against his will.  The net result to me was
that I had three hundred lines to write on my third day at school, and
that, for a well-meaning youth, was tribulation enough.

I took Redwood's advice and wrote the doctor's lines that evening,
trusting to a chance next forenoon of satisfying the demands of Mr
Jarman.  To their credit be it said, some of the faggery helped me out
with my task, and as we all wrote in the same style of penmanship,
namely, a back-handed slope spread out very wide to cover as much ground
as possible, it was very difficult when all was done to believe that the
performance was a co-operative one.

Before going to bed I told Tempest of my adventure, and had the
satisfaction of receiving his complete sympathy.

"That's the worst of Redwood--he'll let it all slide.  I wish I'd been
with you when it happened.  There'd have been a row.  There will some
day, too."

All which was very consoling to me and helped me to sleep soundly.

But the surprise of surprises happened next morning when I encountered
the captain's fag at the door before breakfast with a letter in his
hand.

"Here you are," said he, thrusting the document on me.  "I don't see why
you can't come and fetch your own things instead of me having to run
after you."

"You can walk," said I, "I suppose."

I meant to be conciliatory, but he was highly offended and began to
kick, and it took some little time to pacify him and induce him to
return to the bosom of his house.

When he had gone, I opened the envelope with some little curiosity.
What was my astonishment when I found it enclosed one hundred lines
written out in a bold clear hand, which it was easy to guess was that of
the captain himself!

There was no letter or message; but the explanation was clear enough.
Redwood having got me into my row, had, like a gentleman, paid the
penalty; and as I realised this I could have kicked myself for the
unworthy thoughts I had indulged about him.

I only wished Jarman, to whom in due time I handed the precious
document, could have known its history.

He evidently gave me credit for being an excellent writer, and perhaps
for having an unusual acquaintance, for a boy of my age, with the works
of the Immortal Bard.  For Redwood had grimly selected the following
passage to write out over and over again for the police-master's
benefit: "It is excellent to have a giant's strength; but it is
tyrannous to use it like a giant."

I fear the satire was lost on its victim, and that he meekly concluded I
had selected the passage because it happened to be in my lesson for the
day, and was probably the first to come to hand.

Tempest laughed when I told him.

"It's all very well," said he, "but it's encouraging the enemy.
Redwood's a dear old chap, but he's too much of an anything-for-a-quiet-
life fellow for captain.  By the way, has Crofter replied to your polite
letter?"

"No," said I, "not a word, and I haven't seen him."

"Well, take my advice, kid.  If he wants to kick you, consider yourself
lucky.  If he's extra civil, cut him like mischief.  Some day you may
thank me for the tip."

It seemed queer advice at the time, but I had occasion to call it to
mind later on, as the reader will discover.

By the end of my first week I was pretty well domesticated at Low Heath.
My chief regret was that I saw so little of Dicky Brown; and when we
did meet the only thing we had in common was our lessons, which were not
always congenial topics of conversation.

Dicky was fully imbued with the superiority of the town-boy over the
house boy, and irritated me sometimes by his repeated regret that I was
not eligible for the junior Urbans.

"What do you do?"  I inquired.

"Oh, hosts of things.  We go in for geology, and part songs, and
antiquities, and all that sort of thing; and have excursions--at least,
we're going to have one soon--to look for remains."

"Ah! it's a pity you couldn't come to our picnic next week.  It's to be
no end of a spree."

"Oh, we've heard all about that," said Dicky, with a grin.  "_Mens sano
in corpore sanae_--you should hear some of our chaps yell about that."

"I'm sure it's not a bad motto," ventured I.

"I don't know about that.  But it's not the motto, it's the grammar."

I wasn't quite pleased with Dicky for this.  It seemed as if he thought
he knew more than other people, which I held to be a reprehensible
failing in any one--particularly a day boy.  I flattered myself that, as
an exhibitioner, he had hardly the right to talk to me about grammar.
But it was Dicky's way, and I knew he couldn't help it.

For all that, I referred to the subject in the faggery that evening.  My
comrades were in high glee.  Half a dozen subscriptions had come in,
with requests to be allowed to join the picnic, and a considerable
number of others had asked to be allowed at half price or on the
deferred payment system.

"It's going like anything, Sarah," said Langrish, thumping me violently
on the back.

"Where's the picnic to be?"  I inquired.

"Wouldn't you like to know?" said the secretary.

I said I would, and, as president, considered I was entitled to the
information.

"We're not as green as we look; are we, you chaps?" said Trimble.  "Why,
you don't suppose we're going to let out and give you a chance of
blabbing to the day-boy cads, do you?"

"I'm not any more likely to blab than you are," said I, warmly.

"All serene.  You keep your temper--you'll know time enough."

"Suppose I resigned," said I, feeling I must support my dignity.

"Resign away.  We've got your subscription."

"I don't mean I shall," said I; "but--"

"Shut up, and don't disturb the committee meeting."

"If I'm president, I suppose I've a right to speak."

"Not till you're asked."

"All right," said I, playing my trump card desperately.  "When you do
ask me what's wrong with the grammar of your Latin motto, I sha'n't tell
you.  Ha, ha!--_corpore sanae_.  You should hear the fellows yell."

The effect of this announcement was electrical, Langrish turned white,
and Trimble turned red.  The others bit their nails in silence.  It was
a season of delicious triumph to me.  I was master of the situation for
once, and resolved to remain so as long as possible.

"Why, what's wrong with it?" said Warminster, presently.

"Wouldn't you like to know?" said I.

"_Corpore's_ feminine, isn't it?" asked Coxhead.

"Common gender, I fancy," said Purkis; "depends on who the chap is."

"You mean if it was Sarah it would be feminine, and if it was one of us
it would be masculine," said Langrish.

This was a nasty one for me, but I held my ground.

"You'd better look it up in the dictionary," said I.

This was diplomatic; for although I knew the motto was wrong I could not
quite say what it should have been.

After much labour it was decided that _corpore_ was neuter, and that the
adjective in consequence must be _sanum_.

A resolution to that effect was proposed and seconded, but an amendment
to the effect that as the document had gone out in the name of the
president and every one knew it was his work, it was no business of the
present company to help him out of the mess, was carried by a large
majority.

With which delightful solution of the difficulty--delightful to every
one but myself--we proceeded to the order of the day, which was to
arrange the details of our picnic next half-holiday.

My colleagues remained obdurate on the question of revealing the place.

"If the day fellows get wind of it they'll be sure to try to do us," was
the unfailing reply.

"Why shouldn't _I_ know as well as you?" demanded I.

Whereupon it was explained that nobody knew where the place was to be
yet--nor indeed was he likely to know till the morning of the day, when
lots would be drawn.

Every member of the council would then be permitted to write the name of
a place on a piece of paper, which would be shuffled in a hat and drawn
for--the last paper drawn to be the place.  I could not help admiring
the elaborateness of the precautions, which had only this drawback, as
far as I was concerned, that I did not yet know one place from another.

I casually asked Dicky one day if he knew any of the places round.

"What for, picnics and that sort of thing?" he demanded.

"Well--that sort of thing," said I, anxious not to betray my object too
precisely.

"I don't know.  I heard some chaps talking about Camp Hill Bottom--where
the battle was, you know."

I did not know, but it sounded a likely place, and I made a mental note
of it for the eventful day.

Meanwhile there was much to be decided.  First, as to the applicants for
admission on reduced terms, it was agreed if these brought their fair
share of provender, and in consideration of their being taken on the
cheap would undertake to row or tow the boats up stream, they might
come.  Then as to the bill of fare, it was resolved that no one should
be allowed to take more than he could carry in his pockets--great-coat
pockets not to be used.

Then as to the programme; this was drawn up with a view to combine
entertainment and instruction in even quantities.  For the entertainment
was set down the President's "Inorgural"--the spelling was Langrish's--
address, a part song of the committee, and a public open-air debate or
conservation on "Beauty."  The credit of the last suggestion really
belonged to Tempest, whom I unofficially consulted as to some good
subjects for philosophical discussion.  For the instructive part of the
day's proceedings there was to be the dinner, a boat race, a tug of war,
and, if funds permitted, a display of fireworks.

What concerned me chiefly in the arrangements was that I, as president,
was held responsible for everything of a difficult or hazardous nature.
For instance, I was sent down to select the two boats, and drive a
bargain for their hire.  Then again, when, owing to the prompt payment
of two or three of the "paupers" (as the applicants for reduced terms
were politely styled) rather than submit to the terms imposed, it was
discovered that half-a-crown of the club funds remained unused, it was I
who was sent into Low Heath to buy squibs and Roman candles; and it was
I who was appointed to take charge of the explosives in my hat-box under
my bed till the time arrived for letting them off.

I began to be anxious about my numerous responsibilities (to which, by
the way, was added that of replying in the negative on the question of
Beauty), for every day something fresh was put on my shoulders, and
every day I found my school work falling into arrears.

Tempest and Pridgin both mildly hinted to me that I didn't seem to be
knocking myself up with work, and succeeded in making me uncomfortable
on that score.  What concerned me still more was to find that Dicky
Brown, although not an exhibitioner, kept steadily above me in class,
and put me under frequent obligations by helping me out of difficulties.

Never mind, thought I, it will soon be all right--when once the
Conversation Club picnic is over.

The morning of the eventful day dawned at last; fair on the whole, but
not brilliant.  The faggery was astir early, and before breakfast the
solemn ceremony of drawing lots for the scene of our revels took place.
I faithfully set down Camp Hill Bottom on my paper and committed it to
the hat.

Tempest, who chanced to look in with an order for his fag, was requested
as a favour to officiate as drawer, which he good-naturedly did.  It was
anxious work while he pulled out the first five papers and tossed them
unopened into the fireplace.  Then he drew the sixth and opened it.

"Camp Hill Botton," he read.

Every one seemed pleased, first, because every one had written it on his
paper, and secondly, because it was the only really good place for a
river picnic.

"There's one comfort about it," said Tempest, as we thanked him for his
services, "we shall have a little quiet in this house for an hour or
two.  Take care of yourselves.  Good-bye."



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

THE PICNIC AT CAMP HILL BOTTOM.

Jorrocks, the school boatman, was a careful person, and suited his
accommodation to his company.  He knew something about the expeditions
of "learned societies" to Camp Hill Bottom and elsewhere, and the
conclusion he had evidently come to, was that the boats best suited for
their purpose were craft broad in the beam and deep in draught, in which
it would be possible to argue out any subject without danger to life or
limb.

By a coincidence which afforded more pleasure to my fellow-voyagers than
to me, one of the two boats reserved for the use of the Conversation
Club was named the _Sarah_, the other rejoicing in the inappropriate
name of _Firefly_.  I was, of course, voted to a place of honour in the
former, along with Langrish, Trimble, and seven other Philosophers of
the same kidney; while Coxhead, Warminster, and Purkis took official
charge of the _Firefly_, with an equal number of passengers.

It was noticeable, by the way, that at starting it was impossible for
any two boys to sit close together, by reason of the stoutness of their
pockets, which stood out on either side like rope buoys on the side of a
penny steamer.  Indeed, some of the party seemed to me to be exceeding
the limits laid down by the committee; as, not only were they prominent
on either side, but unusually stout in front, which led one to suspect
that they had converted their entire waistcoats into pockets for the
time being, and stowed them with provisions.  But as the chief
delinquents in this respect were the members of the executive committee,
it was hardly for us to take official notice of it.

A hitch occurred at starting, owing to the uneven distribution of the
"paupers" in the two boats.  The _Sarah_ boasted of six of these,
whereas the _Firefly_ only possessed one, who, when called upon to
fulfil his part of the bargain and row the whole company up stream
single-handed, showed an inclination to "rat."  The crew of the
_Firefly_ also began to be concerned as to the length of the voyage
under such conditions, and clamoured for at least two of our "paupers";
a claim which Trimble and Langrish indignantly repudiated.  At length,
however, after a little judicious splashing and a threat to go off on a
picnic of their own, the point was yielded, and two of our "paupers"
were ignominiously ejected to make room for an equal number of
passengers.

This being done, the question arose as to whether we should row up
stream or tow.  It was decided to proceed by the latter method, at least
until the towing-path became impracticable.  Whereupon both bands of
"paupers" were turned ashore and harnessed to the end of their
respective rope, and the rest of us settled down to enjoy our well-
earned leisure, and stimulate the exertions of our tugs with friendly
exhortations.

I regret to say that the philosophy of our galley-slaves failed to
sustain them in their arduous efforts.  They began well.  The _Sarah_
led the way, the _Firefly_ following close in our wake.  As long as the
friendly emulation between the two teams endured, we made fair progress.
But when it was discovered that the _Firefly_ had meanly hitched itself
on to the stern of the _Sarah_, and was permitting our four "paupers" to
pull the whole cavalcade, a difference of opinion arose.  The _Firefly_
tugs, having nothing to do, amused themselves by peppering the
inoffensive crew of the _Sarah_ with pebbles from the bank; while the
outraged pullers of the _Sarah_, finding themselves tricked, struck work
altogether, and alter pulling our head round into a bed of tall
bulrushes, cast off the yoke and went for their fellow-"paupers."  To
add to the general confusion, a real barge, towed by a real horse, came
down to meet us, threatening with its rope to decapitate the whole of
our party, and, whether we liked it or not, to drag us back to Low
Heath.

In the midst of all this trouble, I, as president, was loudly and
angrily appealed to to "look out" and "make them shut up," and "port the
helm, you lout," as if it was all my fault!  I tried to explain that it
wasn't, but nobody would trouble to listen to me.  How we avoided the
peril of the barge I really cannot tell.  It lumbered past us in a very
bad temper, deluging us as it did so with the splashing from its
suddenly slackened rope, and indulging in remarks on things in general,
and schoolboys in particular, which were not pleasant to listen to, and
quite impossible to repeat.

However, as has been truly said, a common danger is often a common
blessing.  And it turned out so in the present case.  The mutinous
"paupers" brought their arguments on the bank to a close; and it was
decided for the rest of the way to attach the _Firefly_ officially to
the _Sarah_, and allow the seven tugs to pull the lot.  They were quite
sufficiently alive to their own interests to see each pulled his fair
share; and the progress we made, although not racing speed, was,
compared at any rate with our bad quarter of an hour in the bulrushes,
satisfactory.

No further adventure happened till Langrish pointed to a wooded hill a
quarter of a mile further up stream, and said--

"That's Camp Hill.  Jump in, you chaps, and row."

Whereupon the tugs, glad to be relieved, came on board, the two boats
cast loose, and the oars were put out.

"Botheration," said Trimble; "there's a boat ahead of us."

"Only some fisherman--he won't hurt," said Langrish.

But as we approached the spot we perceived, not one boat only, but two,
drawn up under the trees, and both empty.  What was worse, they were Low
Heath boats, and bore the name of Jorrocks on their sterns.

The committee looked glum as our party stepped ashore and proceeded to
make fast our boats to the trees.

"Why can't Jorrocks send his excursionists somewhere else?" growled
Langrish; "I shouldn't wonder if they've bagged the Bottom."

The Camp Hill Bottom was a curious dell among the trees, almost in the
shape of a basin, with heather and gorse all round the top, and
beautiful velvety grass in the hollow.  For a picnic it was an ideal
place: close to the water, sheltered from the wind, with plenty of room
to sit round, and an expanse of delightful heath and wood behind and on
either side.

It was on this heath, the legend went, that one of the most furious
battles in the Wars of the Roses was fought, and the Camp Hill marked
the place where Earl Warwick's standard waved during the engagement.
The Bottom was popularly supposed to have been hollowed out by some
monks, as a burial place for the slain; but their benevolent intention
had been thwarted by the swoop of a band of marauders, who preferred
robbing the slain to burying them, and left most of the monks dead in
their own grave.

There is little sign now of this tragic story about the quiet grass-
grown hollow, with its fringe of overhanging bushes and carpet of mossy
velvet.

Just at present, however, as we made our way to the spot, we had
something more important on our minds than Earl Warwick and the unlucky
monks.  What if the Bottom was already bagged by a crowd of common
holidaymakers, and all our carefully planned picnic was to be spoiled by
their unwelcome intrusion?

It was too true.  As we advanced we could hear sounds of revelry and
laughter, interspersed with singing and cheers.  Who could it be?  The
voices sounded suspiciously youthful.  Suppose--just suppose that the--

Yes!  It was too true!  As we reached the edge and looked down on the
coveted dell the first sight which greeted our eyes was a party of Low
Heathens, sporting the day boys' colours spread out luxuriously on one
of the sloping banks, solacing themselves with provender and songs and
leap-frog!

I never saw twenty Philosophers look more blank than we did when slowly
we realised the horror of the situation.  We were done!  There could be
no doubt that the enemy had got wind of our purpose and had deliberately
forestalled us; and was now only waiting to enjoy our discomfiture, and
make merry over our disappointment.

As to the possibility of their being as sick at the sight of us as we
were at the sight of them, it never even occurred to one of us.

Our first impulse was to eject them by force.  Our next was to
expostulate.  Our third was to ignore them.

"Come on, you chaps," said Langrish, leading the way to the bank facing
that in the occupation of the enemy, "here's our place.  Squat down and
make yourselves comfortable."

The Philosophers followed the cue, and, apparently unaware of the
presence of any strangers, took possession of their slope, and tried to
be as jolly as possible.

"I wonder where the day-boy cads go for their tucks," said Trimble in an
audible voice, evidently intended for the opposition.  "Some one was
saying they were trying to get up a kids' club; ha, ha!  I'd like to see
it."

"Such a joke, Quin," said a voice over the way, evidently pitched to
carry across to us.  "You know those kids in Sharpe's? they've started a
society.  What do you think their motto is?  Oh my, it's a screamer!"

"What is it?" asked the voice of Quin.

"Keep it dark.  I wouldn't like it to get out I told you.  It's _Mens
sani in corpore sanorum_, or something like that.  You should have seen
Redwood yell over it."

"Now, you fellows, let's have our grub," said Langrish encouragingly.
"Chaps must eat, you know.  _Corpore sanum_ is our motto, you know.  Ha,
ha!  What do you think I heard one of the day louts call it?  _Corpore
sanorum_!"

"Ha! ha! ha!" shrieked we.

"Ho! ho! ho!" shrieked the Urbans.

In the midst of which hilarities we produced our provender (greatly to
the relief of our pockets), and fell to.  The operation evidently did
not pass unheeded by the other side.

"I say, Flitwick," cried some one, "do you know what Philosophers eat?"

"No; what?"

"I never knew till just now.  Inky bread and cold bacon-fat sandwiches,
or else sherbet, if their tongues are long enough to reach to the bottom
of the bottles."

"Have some of this fizzing pork pie, Jones?" asked Coxhead
ostentatiously.

"Thanks.  You have some of my sardines," replied I.

"Rummy name for a chap, Sarah, isn't it?" said the voice of the
captain's fag opposite.  "There's a new chap in Sharpe's house this
term, one of the biggest mules you ever saw--his name's Sarah."

"What," replied his friend--"is he an ugly little cad with a turn-up
nose, and yellow kid gloves, that gets lines every day from the doctor,
and can't kick a football as high as his own head?  Rather!  I know
him."

It was impossible to go on much longer at this rate.  The atmosphere was
getting warm all round, and the storm evidently might break at any
moment.

Fortunately for them, the Urbans, of their own accord, averted the
peril.

"If you've done lunch," said Quin, "we'd better get to business.  Our
fellows go in for something besides tuck, don't they, Flitwick?"

"Rather," said Flitwick; "we haven't got a Latin motto that won't parse,
but we meet to improve our minds, not stuff our bodies.  I vote Mr Quin
takes the chair."

"All serene," said Quin, perching himself on a hamper.  "I now call upon
Mr Brown iii. to read us his paper on 'Remains.'"

This was the first mention of my old comrade.  During the interchange of
courtesies during lunch he had kept steadily silent, anxious, no doubt,
to spare my feelings.  But now his chance was come.  It was reserved to
him to show off the Urbans on their intellectual side.

But before he could come to the front and clear his throat for action,
Langrish had loudly called the Philosophers to order.

"Now, you fellows," said he, "we have our programme to get through, and
we are not going to give it up, even if our place of meeting was
swarming with day idiots.  Mr President, you had better lead off."

Thus called upon, I loudly summoned Mr Philosopher Trimble to open the
debate on the subject of "Beauty," venturing to add,--

"Some fellows, I've been told, discuss subjects they know nothing about,
such as 'Remains,' and that sort of thing; but the Conversation Club
makes a point of sticking to what they are familiar with, and that is
why we speak to-day of Beauty."

It would not be easy to give a verbatim report of the proceedings which
followed, for each party was evidently more attentive to what fell from
the other side than to what fell from its own.  And each speaker was
evidently less concerned to impress his friends than his enemies.

But any one who had chanced to stand on the ridge above, half-way
between the two parties, would have heard a medley somewhat of the
following kind,--

"Gentlemen, in addressing you on the subject of remains--"

"--I need hardly explain what we mean when we speak of beauty--"

"--Remains are things dug up out of the earth where they--"

"--make a great mistake in calling things people eat, beautiful.  In
fact--"

"very few of them are to be found unless you know where they are, but--"

"When we talk of a beautiful face we mean a face that is--"

"--plastered over with mud and grime, and hardly recognisable till it is
scraped clean, or--"

"people differ very much about it--what one person thinks beautiful,
another--"

"generally digs for with spades and shovels, and may spend days--"

"--trying to look less ugly than they really are--"

"--some people find this quite impossible and have to employ persons
to--"

"make personal remarks about their neighbours--"

"gentlemen,--"

"I need not remind you that among the Urbans--"

"are to be found some of the most hideous types of ugliness imaginable--
what we need is--"

"--a little common sense to enable us to tell the difference between
shams--"

"--like ourselves and the baboons, which is not always easy.  In
conclusion, gentlemen, I beg to point to our--"

"--dirty hands and faces, which no one who is really interested in
hunting for remains of his native--"

"--ugliness ought to be ashamed of."

And so on.

We were too busy cheering our own orator and listening to the enemy's to
take in the full humour of the medley at the time.  The opening speeches
were evidently prepared beforehand (a good part of them possibly copied
bodily out of some book).  But, as soon as the chairman on either side
declared the subject open for discussion, the interest thickened.

Flitwick led off on "Remains," whereas it fell to my lot to reply on
"Beauty."  By a little sharp practice, I got the lead, which, as it
happened, turned out more to the enemy's profit than my own.

"Gentlemen," shouted I, for the breeze made it necessary to speak out,
"I beg to disagree with all that the last speaker has said."

"Gentlemen," came the answering voice of Flitwick, "in consequence of a
donkey braying somewhere near, I fear I shall find it difficult to make
myself heard."

"When people have nothing to say," continued I, "the less they try to
say the better."

"I will not imitate the idiots who call themselves Philosophers, and yet
don't know what gender a simple Latin word like _corpore_ is."

"It is sad to think how many afflicted ones there are, close to us, who
cannot possibly be as big fools as they look, or look as big fools as
they are."

"The one kind of remains you can't find are the remains of a
Philosopher's lunch.  'Greedy' is a mild word to use for their sickening
gluttony."

"If you want to look for beauty, gentlemen, you should look anywhere but
straight in front of you."  (Cheers.)

"Gentlemen, as I hear some geese quacking, as well as the donkey
braying, I find it difficult to say what I want."  (Laughter.)

"I deny that there is any beauty in the laugh of a pack of hyenas."

"If there was anybody here called Sarah," continued Flitwick, wandering
farther and farther from his point, "who has been brought up in a girls'
school, and wears tan boots and lavender gloves in school (loud and
derisive shouts), and is well-known as the dunce of his house (hear,
hear), I should advise him never to look in the looking-glass if he is
afraid of chimpanzees."

This was too much for the pent-up feelings of the Philosophers--not that
they particularly resented Flitwick's facetious allusions to myself--but
in my capacity as President of the Club they felt called upon to support
me.

"Shut up, cheap-jack!" cried Trimble defiantly.  We had given ourselves
away at last!

"Hullo," cried Flitwick, "there's somebody here!  I wonder if those
little cads of Sharpe's have found out our place?"

"_Your_ place!" thundered Warminster.  "You knew it was ours.  And we
mean to kick you out."

"Ho! ho! when are you going to begin?" shouted the twenty Urbans.

"Now," yelled the twenty Philosophers.

A battle now seemed imminent, as fierce and disastrous as that fought
four centuries before on the adjoining heath.  The blood of both parties
was up, and I might even have found myself engaged in a hand-to-hand
combat with my old chum Dicky, had not Tempest unexpectedly appeared on
the scene, like a bolt out of the blue.

He was pushing along his bicycle, and had evidently been attracted to
the Bottom by the noise.

"What's up?" he inquired, taking advantage of the temporary silence.

"Those day-boy cads have come and bagged our places and spoiled our
fun," said we.

"No, it's your kids who have come and stopped ours," protested the
enemy.

"And you're all going down into the middle to have a mill," said
Tempest.  "Just as you like.  But why don't you try a tug of war across
instead?  You're pretty evenly matched, and I'll umpire!"

It was not a bad idea, and took beautifully.  The only drawback was,
that Tempest being a Sharper, was presumably prejudiced in favour of the
Philosophers.  However, he had the reputation of being addicted to fair
play.

"The side that's pulled down," said he, "clears out, and goes somewhere
else; and the side that wins I'll photograph in a group."

It was a tremendous prize to offer, and served to stimulate both teams
to the uttermost.  We had a rope with us which easily stretched across
the dell, and admitted the twenty pairs of hands on either side to grasp
it.  Tempest carefully saw that neither side started with the least
advantage, and waited till we were all ready before giving the signal.

A tug of war in which each side is ranged up the steep slope of a hollow
is very different work from a tug on the level, as we soon found out.
Indeed, as soon as the rope was stretched, those lowest down were
hanging on to it by their finger tips, while those higher up were
obliged to sit down to get within anything like reach.  Under these
circumstances the contest was short and sharp, and ended in a draw.  For
each side lost its footing the moment the strain was applied, and almost
before Tempest had given the signal, the whole forty of us were
sprawling in a confused heap on the grassy floor of the Bottom.

This abortive contest had the effect (which probably Tempest intended)
of smoothing over, to some extent, the angry dispute which was on foot,
and which was still further allayed by his undertaking to take a monster
joint photograph of the two clubs, provided we stood or sat still for
the process.

After that, he good-naturedly remained at our invitation, to officiate
as judge in some impromptu sports, in which, once again, the rival
parties proved most evenly matched.  Finally, as evening was drawing on,
he consented just to witness a hurried display of our joint fireworks,
after which, he told us, we must at once take to our boats and repair
home.

It was an imposing display.  Twelve Roman candles were set up at regular
distances round the hollow, with a fellow in charge of each.  Two
rockets were set in position, one on either side, and green and red
lights alternately were planted on the banks above.  At a given signal
from Tempest, all were simultaneously lit, and in a perfect blaze of
glory, accompanied by a babel of cheers, we concluded our programme.

At least, not quite.  One unrehearsed incident was yet to come.  For, as
the smoke cleared off and the noise ceased, and our eyes once more grew
accustomed to the twilight, we became aware of the presence of Mr
Jarman, standing in our midst!



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

EXTRA DRILL.

Mr Jarman must have felt flattered at the gloomy dead silence which
fell on Philosophers and Urbans alike as we looked round and saw him.
It was of course impossible to believe he had found us by accident,
still less that he had come with any friendly purpose.

He advanced into the middle of the Bottom, watch in hand.

"This is contrary to rules," said he.  "It is now a quarter-past six,
and you are half an hour from Low Heath.  In addition to which I have
already said that fireworks are only to be had with leave.  Tempest, you
should have put an end to this.  You will kindly send me in the name of
every boy here.  And each of you boys must attend an extra drill to-
morrow and write out one hundred lines--except," added he, catching
sight of me, "except Jones iv., whom I have already had to punish, and
who must write two hundred lines."

It was a study to watch Tempest's face during this speech.  It was all
he could do to wait to the end.

"It's not fair," said he, with pale cheeks and angry brow.  "It's a
half-holiday, and boys always get half an hour's grace."

"That is not the rule," said the master.

"It's the practice, sir.  Half these boys are in my house, and I have
given them leave to stay.  I also allowed the fireworks."

"Tempest, we will speak of this presently--"

"No, sir," blurted out Tempest, "the fellows have done nothing wrong;
and if they have, I'm responsible to Dr England about it."

Mr Jarman was not the man to give himself away in a public discussion,
and coolly walked off, observing--

"I shall expect the list of names to-night, Tempest."

Tempest's reply was a short, defiant laugh, which made the master turn a
moment, as if about to notice it.  But he departed silently, and left us
to recover as well as we could from the surprise of the whole scene.

The general opinion was that the policeman had met his match at last in
Tempest; and the more enthusiastic of us tried to express our feelings
in words.  But Tempest was by no means inclined to discuss the
situation.

"Shut up," he replied angrily, when I ventured to applaud his courage.
"Cut back to school at once, and don't speak to me."

This was a blow to some of the party, who had calculated on a general
revolt, to be headed by the rock of Sharpe's house in person, and
celebrated by general orgies on the spot.

"I sha'n't do my lines, shall you?" said Dicky, as we trotted down to
the boats.

"Rather not.  And I don't think our chaps will turn up for extra drill."

"Just like old Tempest," said Brown.  "He enjoys a row of this kind."

"He didn't look as if he did," remarked I.  "Perhaps that was because
such a lot of day chaps are mixed up in it."

Brown looked a little glum at this.

"He needn't bother about us unless he likes," said he.  "We can take
care of ourselves, I fancy."

Luckily at this stage we reached the boats, and further discussion was
interrupted.

The voyage home was comparatively uneventful.  It was of course
enlivened by a desultory race with the Urbans all the way, in which, I
regret to say, Mr Jorrocks's boats received a few scratches, owing to
the desire of each boat to take the water of its opponent before it was
clear ahead.  The town-boys unrighteously claimed in the end to have won
by a quarter of a length, but as in passing our leader they had pulled
away one of our bow oars and further turned the nose of the _Sarah_ into
the bank, we stoutly resisted their claim, and a very lively argument
ensued, in which Mr Jorrocks lost a good deal of varnish, and most of
the combatants became rather wet.  However, we were back in school
within half an hour of embarking, which on the whole was not a bad
record.

Curiosity to know what Tempest would do prevented us from so much as
thinking of our "lines."  I took an early opportunity of presenting
myself in Pridgin's study, feeling sure I should be likely to hear
something of the matter there.

As it happened, Tempest and Wales were there too, in deep confabulation.

"Look here, old chap," Pridgin was saying, "don't spoil your term for a
parcel of yelping young puppies like this kid here and his lot.  They're
not worth it."

"For all that," said Wales, "it's a question of whether the cock of a
house is to be allowed his rights or not."

"It's more a question whether Jarman is to be allowed his rights," said
Tempest.  "I quite agree that these young muffs are a nuisance, and it's
all the more aggravating to be dragged into a mess by them.  But he'd no
right to interfere."

"Strictly speaking, I suppose he was right," said Pridgin.  "There is a
rule about juniors being in by 6:30; although every one knows half an
hour's grace is given on half-holidays.  And I suppose he's right about
the fireworks."

"You think I ought to cave in?" asked Tempest.

"I don't say that.  But I'd let the matter alone."

"We shall never stop Jarman at that rate," said Wales.  "I should say
fight it out."

"All very well for you and me," said Pridgin, "who are comfortably out
of it.  But it means a big job for old Tempest.  He'll have to bear the
brunt of it."

"I can't well drop it when he's told me to give him a list of the
youngsters present," said Tempest.

"You certainly are not called upon to give him a list of the day boys."

"Well, as I only know one of them, it wouldn't be easy.  If he'd only
lagged me, and given me extra drill and lines, it wouldn't have been so
bad.  But it was playing it low down to--"

Here came a knock at the door, and the school messenger entered with a
letter.

"No answer," said he, handing it to Tempest.

It was plain to see by the flush on Tempest's face as he read it that it
contained anything but pleasant news.

"It's from Jarman," said he, throwing it down on the table.

Wales took it up and read it.

"Mr Jarman informs Tempest that the list of names required in
connection with this afternoon's incident will not be required, as Mr
Jarman already has it.  Tempest will please attend the extra drill with
the other boys of his house to-morrow, as his conduct this afternoon was
neither respectful nor a good example to others."

"Whew!" exclaimed Pridgin, rising, for a wonder, out of his chair;
"that's a nasty one, if you like.  He's taken you at your word, old man.
Who's given the list of names?  Did you, you young sweep?" he demanded
of me.

"Oh no," said I, glad to be recognised under any term of endearment.  "I
wouldn't think of doing such a thing.  But I'll tell you what I think."

"Really, Jones iv., it's nice to know you do think; but, if you don't
mind, we would rather not hear.  If you _know_ anything, let us hear it,
but spare us your thoughts."

Pridgin was rather crushing sometimes.

"I meant we were marked off by the porter at the lodge as we came in,"
said I.  "Perhaps that's how he's got the names."

"Evidently," said Pridgin, "he's had you for once.  Tempest.  He guessed
there'd be a bother about the list, and he has taken the wind out of
your sails.  You'll attend extra drill, of course."

"Certainly."

"So that," said Wales, "all you will score by the affair will be a
public disgrace before the juniors."

Tempest's half dismal, half wrathful face was answer enough.

"_We_ sha'n't consider it a disgrace," said I.

"Thank you very much, Jones iv.  If that is so, we shall feel it was
worth living for to have your approbation.  Now you had better go and
write out your lines."

"What?" said I.  "I thought we were none of us going to do that."

"I have warned you once against the perils of thinking.  It's a bad
habit for little boys.  Off you go, or you won't get your _poena_ done
in time."

"What am I to tell the others?"  I inquired.

"You may tell them it's a fine evening.  Cut--do you hear?"

It was a great come-down.  The Philosophers thought so when I reported
the case.  Some were inclined to be angry with Tempest, others to pity
him; and every one was unanimous, I do not know why, in expressing a
burning desire to kick me.

The expectation of a general revolt, headed by Tempest in person, and
reinforced by the Urbans, faded dismally away as the company saw itself
going down to "knock off" Mr Jarman's lines.

"This comes," said Langrish, rather illogically, I thought, "of getting
mixed up with the day-boy cads.  I knew it would land us in a mess, and
so it has."

"Anyway, they're in the mess too," said Trimble.

"It's a little rough on Tempest having to show up for them as well as
for us," said I.

"Shut up, and let a fellow write his lines, can't you?" growled Coxhead.
"When we want Sarah's advice we'll ask for it."

The reader will gather from this that the Philosophers were in bad
tempers, and that their president was in imminent danger of losing his.

At noon next day, when most of the school was turning out after morning
class into the fields, a melancholy band might have been seen dropping
in, in irregular order, at the door of the school gymnasium.  All except
one were juniors.  Some looked as if they were used to the thing, other
betrayed the shy and self-conscious embarrassment of the first
delinquents.  None looked cheerful, not a few looked savage.  The
exception in point of age was a well set-up, square-shouldered, proud-
faced senior, who entered with an air of reckless disgust which was not
comfortable to look at, and might be dangerous if provoked.  None of us
spoke to Tempest, and he vouchsafed no sign of recognition of us.

A squad of the school volunteers, chiefly composed of smart boys from
Mr Selkirk's house, were concluding drill as we entered, and of course
took stock of our dejected looks and of Tempest's unwonted appearance as
they filed out.

"A row on, eh?" whispered one, as he passed us.

"It doesn't look like fun, does it?" snarled Langrish.

"Where does Tempest come in?" persisted the inquirer.

"By the door; and the sooner you get out by it the better."

"Ha, ha!--poor little naughty boys.  An extra drill will do you good.
Come on, you chaps.  Let's leave them to enjoy themselves.  They'll get
used to it in time.  Ho, ho!"

"Fall in!" called Mr Jarman.

And painfully conscious not only that a few of the volunteers were
hanging about to look on, but that the school porter was at the moment
conducting a party of visitors through the building, we obeyed
listlessly and dismally.  Tempest taking his place at the end of the
line.

"Are these some of the volunteers?" we heard one of the lady spectators
ask.

"No, madam.  This is an extra drill for breach of rules," replied the
official.

"Number from the right," cried Mr Jarman.

We numbered.

"Answer to your names," said the discipline master, producing a paper.
We could not help noticing that Tempest's name was mixed in along with
ours, and that no difference was made on account of his age or status.
We were then formed into double rank, and fours, and open order, and put
through a hideous series of extension exercises, irksome enough at any
time, but under present circumstances specially so.  I heard Dicky Brown
beside me groan as he stood leaning over with his left knee bent, his
right leg stretched out behind, and his two arms doubled up at his side.

"I wonder they don't all kick," he whispered.

"Not easy like this," said I.

"How Tempest must be enjoying it!"  Dick murmured.

"Poor beggar! it's a nasty dose for him."

But if Mr Jarman counted on any protest or resistance from his senior
victim, he was disappointed.  Tempest went patiently and impassively
through the drill with the rest of us; but, as we could see, with a
blazing eye fixed all the while on the master.  But I could guess the
struggle that was going on in my friend's breast.  Mr Jarman may have
flattered himself he was "taking it out of him", Dicky and I knew
better.

We all took our cue from Tempest that morning, and any inclination to
rebel or mutiny was suppressed.  We contented ourselves with glaring at
our tormentor, and denying him the excuse he probably desired of
prolonging the agony.  My impression is that Mr Jarman was never so
happy as when he realised that he was absolute master of the situation.
The Roman emperors were not in it with him.

"Attention!  Front!" said he at last, when the proceedings were becoming
dull even to him.  "Stand at ease!  Attention!  Stand at ease!
Attention!  Left turn!  Dismiss!  As you were!  Dismiss!"

It was a prolonged insult, and we knew it.  But Tempest stood it, and
so, consequently, did we.  But as we filed from the place we felt that
Mr Jarman's turn would come some day.

Tempest, contrary to general expectation, evinced no haste to leave the
scene of his tribulation.  There was yet a quarter of an hour to next
bell, and this he evidently decided to spend, as he had the right to do,
where he was.  Mr Jarman was evidently annoyed to find, not only that
the senior was apparently unaffected by the humiliation through which he
had passed, but that now the drill was over he evinced an entire
unconcern in the master's presence.

Tempest was one of the best gymnasts in the school, and it was always
worth while to watch him on the trapeze and horizontal bar.  So the
Philosophers and Urbans, by one consent, trooped back into the gymnasium
to look on, and (what must have been particularly annoying to the
master, because he had no authority to stop it) to cheer.  How we did
cheer, and what good it did us!  Had Tempest been the meanest of
performers, and done nothing but swing with his legs doubled up under
him from one ring to the next, we should have applauded.  But to-day his
flights were terrific.  No fellow was less given to show off, and he
probably objected to our applause as much as Mr Jarman.  But he was
bound to relieve his feelings somehow, and the trapeze was just what he
wanted.

When finally the bell rang, and we were hoarse with cheering (which was
our way of relieving our feelings) he came to earth decidedly better for
his exercise.

Mr Jarman evidently was impressed, and, to our surprise, even ventured
on a compliment.

"You did that well, Tempest."

Tempest's reply was to walk away, putting on his coat as he went.

It was plain to see by the angry twitch of Mr Jarman's mouth that the
shaft of this public snub had gone home, and we who looked on and
witnessed it all had little need to tell ourselves that civil war had
already been declared.

It is hardly necessary to state that the extraordinary meeting of the
Conversation Club that evening was lively, and that there was no lack of
a topic.  Besides our own contingent, a few of the outsiders, including
Muskett and Corderoy from Selkirk's house, and a few of the "paupers,"
dropped in.  As the faggery would only conveniently hold six persons,
and as at least twenty were present, it was considered advisable to
adjourn to the shoe-room, where, in the dim light of a small candle,
several particularly revolutionary motions were discussed, the company
sitting on the floor for the purpose.

The meeting opened by my calling on Langrish to read the minutes, which
he accordingly did.

"The inaugural picnic of the Ph.C.C. was held the other day.  Present,
all the usual lot and seven paupers.  The president had chartered the
_Sarah_ and _Firefly_, two of the vilest crocks at Jorrocks's."

"He said they were the best they had got," I explained.

"Shut up, or you'll be kicked out, young Sarah."

"I've a right to speak."

"No, you haven't--unless you hold your tongue."

"If I held my tongue, I couldn't possibly speak," I explained.

"Turn him out!" cried the paupers.  Whereat I subsided.

"The paupers," continued the minutes, "had beastly little go in them,
and ought to have had a meal of hay before starting (interruption), and
will be badly kicked if they don't shut up.  The _Firefly_ had the best
of the race up."  (Here there were most indignant protests from the crew
of the gallant _Sarah_; and the question was argued out with some energy
on the floor of the shoe-room before Langrish could proceed.)

"Nature was dressed in her most pristine colours, and the incandescent
hues of the autumn leaves brought cries of enjoyment out of the mouths
of the Ph.C.C, except the paupers, whose mouths were too full for
utterance."

This paragraph was not likely to pass unchallenged.  Coxhead impeached
its grammar, Trimble its taste, and the paupers its accuracy, and a very
heated argument ensued, at the end of which it was agreed to let the
door stand open a few minutes to get rid of the dust.

"Arrived at Camp Hill, a flock of jibbering apes were discovered, headed
by the president's arch-enemy.  Brown iii."

"No, he's not my enemy," protested I.  "I never said so."

"The minutes say so.  They're more likely to be right than you."

"But I like Dicky Brown," said I.

"That sounds like poetry," said Warminster, "ho, ho!

  "I like Dicky Brown,
  His cheek is so cool,
  And if I don't kick him
  You call me a fool."

"I can do that whether you kick him or not," said I, quite unmoved by
this brilliant impromptu.

Here I was compelled to vacate the chair for a few moments, in order to
discuss the matter further with Warminster.  On order being restored,
the minutes proceeded--

"The Philosophers soon made it too hot for these mules, and they were
only allowed to stay on the ground as it amused us to see their idiotic
sniggers.  The paper on 'Beauty' was rot, and invoked well-deserved
hisses."

"Say that again," ejaculated the outraged Trimble.

"_That_! there you are," said Langrish hurriedly.  But Trimble had more
to say on the subject, and once again the meeting became warm and dusty.

"Order, please; let's hear the rest," said I, when both had been brushed
down by their friends.

"As for Sarah's speech in reply, it was the drivellingest balderdash you
ever heard.  It made the club blush."

"That speaks well for it," I suggested mildly.

The meeting did not seem to know how exactly to take this, but concluded
it was meant to be complimentary, and contented themselves with ordering
me to "shut up" if I didn't want to be kicked out.

"Tempest (loud cheers) turned up presently and backed us up (cheers).
The baboons weren't in it in the sports.  We pulled off the tug of war
on our heads (cheers), and their speeches were even drivellinger than
Trim's and Sarah's.  (Interruption.)  Just at the end a howling sneak
and cad and outsider called Jarman came, and lagged us all, including
Tempest.  (Groans.)  Our president behaved like a mutton-head
throughout.  Going home, the Philosophers led by several miles.  The
meeting then adjourned for extra drill in the gym. to-day, and mean to
pay Jarman out."  (Cheers.)

The patriotic sentiment with which the minutes concluded did away with
any little difference arising earlier is the evening, and they were
carried unanimously.

It was then moved, seconded, thirded, fourthed, and fifthed, "that
Jarman be, and is hereby, hung, and ought to be kicked."

It was further agreed, "that Tempest be elected an Honorary Philosopher,
and be let off entrance fee."

Also, "that the town cads are about the biggest outsiders going."

Also, "that Trimble be requested to wash his face."

This last was not carried without some opposition, Trimble's amendment,
"that you be hung," being lost only by a narrow minority.  Finally it
was resolved unanimously--

"That the Philosophers' Conversation Club make it hot all round for any
one who doesn't want to kick Jarman or back up Tempest."

With which highly satisfactory piece of business accomplished, we
adjourned to our own studies, and finally to bed.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

EXPLOSIVE MATERIAL.

It was plain to be seen that Tempest, although he had borne his
humiliating penalty like a man, had been badly bruised by it.  Not that
he broke out into any wild rebellion, or tried to make for himself a
party to avenge his wrongs; but he seemed to have either lost interest
in his work as house captain, or to enjoy disturbing the sensibilities
of his friends by a reckless indifference to its affairs.

The story of his "extra drill" had become public property in Low Heath.
Most of the fellows sympathised with him, but could not understand why
he had not appealed to the head master.  A few, a very few, suggested
that he had come badly out of the business; but no one particularly
cared to discuss the matter with him.

To Pridgin and Wales he insisted that it was no use referring to Dr
England.  The Head was bound to support his policeman.

"Why not get Redwood to take it up?" suggested Pridgin.

"Redwood!  He wouldn't go a yard out of his way.  What does it matter to
him--a day boy?  No, old chap, we can take care of ourselves.  There'll
be a return match one day!"

It concerned me to hear my old friend talk like this; still more to
notice how he began to lose grip in Sharpe's house.  No news flies so
fast in a school as that of a responsible head boy being slack or "out
of collar."  And when once it is known and admitted, it takes a good
deal to keep the house from going slack and "out of collar" too.

In our particular department the relaxing of authority was specially
apparent.  It destroyed some of the interest in our philosophical
extravagances; for the dread of coming across the powers that be lends a
certain flavour to the routine of a junior boy.  It also tended to
substitute horseplay and rowdyism for mere fun--greatly to the detriment
of our self-respect and enjoyment.

On the whole, then, Sharpe's house had a heavier grudge against Mr
Jarman than it suspected.

The worst of the whole business was that Tempest himself seemed not to
see the effect of his attitude on the house at large.  He did not
realise how much the juniors were impressed by what he said and how he
looked, or how much his example counted with others of a less imitative
turn.  He looked upon his grievance as his own affair, and failed to
give himself credit for all the influence he really possessed.

One curious result of the upset was that Crofter was now and then to be
found in his fellow-seniors' rooms.  He had blossomed out as an ardent
anti-Jarmanite, and belonged to the party who not only vowed revenge,
but was impatient at delay.  Tempest's wrongs he seemed to feel as
keenly as if they had been his own; and the insults put upon Sharpe's
house he took to heart as warmly as any one.

Tempest could hardly help tolerating this effusively-offered sympathy,
although he made no profession of liking it, and continued to warn me
against having more to do than I could help with Crofter.  Pridgin was
even less cordial, but his laziness prevented his taking any active
steps to cut the connection.  Wales, on the other hand, though Tempest's
chum, took more kindly to the new-comer, and amused himself now and
again by defending him against his detractors.

"The wonder to me is," said Crofter, "Jarman has not caught it before
now.  We're not the only house he's insulted, although I don't think
he's tried it on with any of the others as he has with us."

"Some day he'll find he's sailing a little too near the wind," said
Tempest, with a pleasant confusion of metaphors; "and then he'll get
bowled out."

"Upon my word, though," said Wales, "I think we've a right to get that
extra drill of yours wiped out.  It stands against you on the register,
and it's a scandal to the house."

"They seem to think it so," observed Pridgin, as just then a loud chorus
of war-whoops came up from the region of the faggery.  "Somebody had
better stop that row!"

"Jarman had better come and do it," said Tempest, laughing.  "He's got
charge of the morals of Sharpe's house now."

When in due time I returned, somewhat depressed by what I had overheard,
to the faggery, I discovered that the particular occasion of the
triumphal shout referred to had been a proposal by Langrish to celebrate
the approaching Fifth of November by hanging, and, if possible, burning
Mr Jarman in effigy, for which purpose an overcoat of mine had already
been impounded.  I had the greatest difficulty in rescuing it from the
hands of the marauders, who represented to me that it was my duty to
sacrifice something for the public good.

"Why don't you let them have _your_ coat, then?"  I asked.

"Because," was the insinuating reply, "it wouldn't burn as well."

"You won't have mine," I insisted.  "But I tell you what; I've got an
old hat and pair of boots I--I don't often wear--you can have them."

A shout of laughter greeted this ingenuous offer--but it saved my top-
coat.  And when in time my flat-topped pot-hat and tan boots were
produced, there was general rejoicing.  Each Philosopher present tried
them on in turn, and finally I was compelled to wear them, as well as my
top-coat, for the rest of the evening, and assist in a full-dress
rehearsal of the proposed hanging of the discipline master, in which,
greatly to my inconvenience, I was made to personate Mr Jarman.

The following day I was enjoying a little hard-earned solitude, and
amusing myself by leaning over the bridge and watching the boats below,
when a voice at my side startled me.

"Ah, my polite letter-writer, is that you?  The very chap I want."

It was Crofter.  My instinct at first, especially on the sly reference
to my letter of apology, was to fly.  On second thoughts it seemed to me
wiser to remain.  Crofter and Tempest were on better terms now.  It
would be best to be civil.

"What is it?"  I asked.

"Can you steer a boat?"

"A little," said I.

"Does that mean you can run it into the bank every few yards?"

"Oh no, I've often steered Tempest and Pridgin."

"Come along, then; I'm going to have a spin up to Middle-weir."

If there was one thing I enjoyed it was steering a boat, and I was not
long in accepting the invitation.

Crofter was not conferring a favour on me; only making a convenience of
me.  So that I was not in any way making up to him.  Our relations were
that of senior and fag only; and Tempest's and Pridgin's warnings to
beware when he was particularly friendly (even if it had not already
been cancelled by the fact that they now frequently had Crofter in their
rooms) could hardly apply now.

For all that, I did not feel quite comfortable, and was glad, on the
whole, that the embarkation did not take place under the eyes of my
patrons.

For some time Crofter sculled on in silence, giving me directions now
and again to keep in the stream, or take the boat well out at the
corners--which I considered superfluous.  Presently, however, when we
were clear of Low Heath he slacked off and began to talk.

"I enjoyed that letter of yours," said he; "did you write it all
yourself?"

"Yes," said I, feeling and looking very uncomfortable.

"You and Tempest must be quite old chums."

"Yes."

"It's very rough on him, all this business."

"Yes, isn't it?" said I, somewhat won over by this admission.

"The worst of it is, it makes the house run down.  I expected we were
going to do big things this term."

"It's not Tempest's fault if we don't," said I.

"Of course not.  It's Jarman's.  Every one knows that.  It's rather a
pity Tempest takes it so meekly, though.  Fellows will think he's either
afraid or doesn't care; and neither would be true."

"I should think not."

There was a pause, during which Crofter sculled on.  Then he said,--

"Tempest and I don't hit it, somehow.  He doesn't like me, does he?"

"Well--no, I don't fancy he does," I admitted.

"I dare say he advises you to fight shy of me, and that sort of thing,
eh?"

This was awkward; but I could not well get out of it.

"Yes."

Crofter laughed sweetly.

"I wish he'd let me be friends.  I hate to see a fellow coming to grief,
and not be allowed to give him a leg-up."

"Tempest's not coming to grief," said I.

"Well, not perhaps that, only it's a pity he's adding to his other
troubles by getting head-over-ears in debt.  I hear he's been going it
pretty well in the shops.  You should give him a friendly tip."

This was a revelation to me.  I had gathered some time ago, from what
Pridgin had said, that there was some fear of it; but I had hoped I had
made a mistake.

"Who told you?" said I.

"A good many people are talking about it; including some of the shopmen.
It's just one of those things that a fellow himself never dreams
anybody knows about till it's public property.  That's why I wish I were
on good enough terms to give him the tip."

"If he's owing anybody he'll pay," said I, feeling a great sinking in my
heart.

"Look out for that stake in the water there; pull your left!  Narrow
shave that.  Of course he means to pay.  What I'm afraid of is, Jarman
or England or any of them getting to hear of it.  Ever since Sweeten
last year got turned out of the headship of his house, and afterwards
expelled, it's seemed to me to be a risky thing for a fellow to run into
debt.  These shopmen are such sneaks.  If they can't get their money
from the fellow, they send their bills in to the house master, and
sometimes to the head master; and then it's a precious awkward thing.
How are you getting on in your form?"

I had not much spirit to tell him, and if I had there was no time, for
just then the swish of a pair of sculls came round the corner behind us,
and presently a boat at almost racing speed appeared in sight.

"Pull your right!" said Crofter.  "Hallo! it's one of our fellows.
Looks like Tempest himself."

I wished myself at the bottom of the river then!  What would he think of
me if he saw me, and if he knew what I had been listening to?

In my perturbation I over-pulled my line and sent our boat into the
bank.  Tempest, who evidently was relieving himself with a spin of hard
exercise after his fashion, and imagined he had the river to himself,
was bearing down straight upon us.

"Hallo, there; keep her out!" shouted Crofter.

Tempest looked round in a startled way, and held water hard to avoid a
collision.  Then, as he suddenly took in who we were, his face
lengthened, and he came to a halt alongside.

"You there, Jones iv.?"

"Yes, would you like me to come and steer you?" said I.

Considering the difficulty into which I had just landed my present boat,
it was difficult to flatter myself any one would exactly compete for my
services.  But Tempest answered shortly,--

"Come along."

"Hullo, I say," said Crofter suavely, but with a flush on his cheeks,
"he's steering me, Tempest."

"He's doing no good.  He's stuck you in the bank already.  Come along,
Jones."

"I haven't done with him yet," said Crofter, flushing still more deeply
as his voice became sweeter.  "I want him to stay with me."

"And I don't want him to stay with you," blurted out Tempest, losing his
temper.  "I've told him so already.  He can do as he likes, though."

And he began to dip his sculls again in the water.

"No," said I, "I want to come in your boat, Tempest."

"Come along, then;" and he backed his stern up towards me.

Crofter made no further protest; but greeted my desertion with a
mellifluous laugh, which made me more uncomfortable than a storm of
objurgations.

Tempest said nothing, but dug his blades viciously in the water, and
spun away with grim face and clenched teeth.

For a quarter of a mile he sculled on before he lay on his oars and
exclaimed,--

"You young fool!"

"Why," pleaded I, "I didn't think you'd mind.  He's been friendly enough
to you lately."

"Bah!  What do I care what he is to me?  I told you to fight shy of the
fellow, and there you go and give yourself away to him."

I did not quite like this.  Tempest spoke to me as if I had not a soul
of my own, and had no right to do anything without his leave.

"He was speaking quite kindly about you," persisted I.

Tempest checked the contemptuous exclamation which came to his lips, and
said, more earnestly than I had heard him yet,--

"Look here, Jones; that fellow's a cad; and he'll make a cad of you, if
you let him.  Don't believe a word he says to you, unless he calls you a
fool."

"I hope what he's been saying to-day will turn out to be Lies," said I
oracularly.

To my disappointment Tempest evinced no curiosity as to my meaning, and
relapsed into gloomy silence for the rest of the voyage.

For the first time in my life I felt out of humour with my old Dux.  He
had no right to treat me like a baby, or dictate to me whom I was to
know and whom I was not to know in Low Heath.  No doubt he thought he
was doing me a good turn, and honestly thought ill of Crofter.  But it
did not follow he was not doing him an injustice, and demanding that I
should join in it.

At any rate, I felt heartily miserable, and wished I had never put foot
outside the faggery that day.

About a mile from home Tempest got out on the towing-path, and said he
would trot to the school while I paddled the boat home.  It was some
relief to be left alone; a relief, however, which was considerably
tempered by the fear of meeting Crofter, and having to explain matters
to him.  That difficulty fortunately did not occur, and I got back to
the bosom of the Philosophers without further adventure.

In their sweet society I gradually recovered my spirits.  Their
enthusiasm for Tempest was still unabated, and their avowed contempt for
his enemies all the world over was refreshing.  A night's reflection
further repaired my loyalty.  After all, thought I, Tempest meant well
by me, and was willing to make an enemy for my sake.  He might be wrong,
of course; but suppose he _was_ right--

The result of all these inward musings was that I offered Trimble to do
Tempest's fagging in his place next morning.

He seemed half to expect me, and the old friendly look was back in his
face as he saw me enter.

"I'm sorry I offended you yesterday, Tempest," said I.

"I fancied it was I offended you," said he; "but I couldn't stand seeing
you in that cad's clutches."

"Is he really a cad, then?"  I asked.

"You don't suppose I asked you into my boat for fun, do you?" said he
shortly.

I went on for some time with my work, and then said,--

"Would you like to know what he was saying about you?"

"Not a bit," said he, so decisively that I relapsed again into silence.

"Look here, kid," said he, presently, and with unwonted seriousness.
"I'm not a saint, and don't profess to be.  And I may not be able to
manage my own affairs, to judge by what you and half a dozen other of
the fellows seem to think; but I don't want to see you--well, come to
grief--and that's what you're likely to do if you let that fellow get
hold of you."

"He's not got hold of me," said I, feeling a little hurt once more.
"Mayn't I be civil to a fellow, even?  Why, he was saying if you--"

"Shut up! didn't I tell you I don't want to hear?" said he.

"Oh, all right."

If he had only vouchsafed to tell me why he disliked Crofter, or if he
had given his counsel in a less authoritative way, it would have been
different.  He would not even let me repeat the friendly remarks Crofter
had made about him; and was determined neither to say a good word for
the fellow himself, nor let me say one.

The consequence was that our interview ended in my wishing once more I
had confined myself to my own quarters and let ill alone.

My companions were not long in discovering that something was on my
mind, and in their gentle way tried to cheer me up.

"What's the row--ear-ache?" demanded Trimble.

"He's blue because he's not had lines to-day," suggested Langrish.

"Perhaps his washerwoman has sent in her bill," said Coxhead.

"You'll get kicked out of here, if you look so jolly blue," said
Warminster.  "It's stale enough this term, without having a chap with a
face like a boiled fish gaping at you."

"Look here," said I, resolved to be candid as far as I dare.  "I'm in a
jolly mess--"

"Never knew you out of it.  What's up?" said Langrish.

"Really though, no larks," said I.  "Tempest's down on me because I went
out with Crofter, and Crofter's down on me because I cut him for
Tempest.  That's enough to give a chap blues, isn't it?"

"There seems to be a run on Sarah," said Trimble.  "Anybody got a
halfpenny?"

"What for?"  I inquired, as the requisite coin was planked down on the
table.

"Heads Tempest, tails Crofter," said Langrish.

It was heads, and I was solemnly ordered to adhere to Crofter.

"We'll square it with Tempest," said they.  "He'll probably keep his
shutters up for a day or two, but he'll soon get over it."

"But," said I, "I mean to stick to Tempest as well.  The fact is, from
what I hear,"--little I realised the fatal error I was making!--"he's in
rather a bad way himself."

"How?"

"Well, don't tell; but he's owing a lot in the shops; and if he can't
pay he'll get shown up."

There was a whistle of dismay at this.  Sweeten's fate was still fresh
in the memory of some of the faggery.

"We'll have to give him a leg-up," was the general verdict.

"Oh, don't let out I told you!" said I, beginning to get alarmed at the
interest my revelation had evoked.

"Who's going to say a word about you?  We can back up the cock of our
own house, I suppose, without asking your precious leave.  You go and
black Crofter's boots.  We'll see old Tempest through."

This was not at all what I wanted.  I had at least hoped to be
recognised as Tempest's leading champion in this company.  Whereas, here
was I coolly shunted, my revelation coolly appropriated, and my services
unceremoniously dispensed with.  I did not like it at all.

"This dodge about stringing up Jarman's guy," said Trimble, "ought to
help our man a bit.  It'll show we're taking the matter up.  By the way,
Sarah's not heard the latest--we're going to blow him up as well as hang
him."

And they proceeded to explain that the guy was to be filled chock-full
of fireworks and gunpowder, and his tongue to be made of touch-paper.
Altogether, he was to be a most dangerous and explosive effigy; and I,
as president of the Philosophical Conversation Club, was naturally
selected to take charge of him.

I pleaded hard for a sub-committee to assist me, but they would not hear
of it.

"It'll only be a day or two," said they, "to the Fifth of November.
We'll have his stuffing all in to-morrow--there's almost enough
fireworks left over from the picnic to load him.  Then you can stow him
away quiet somewhere till the day.  Couldn't you stick him under your
bed?"

"Oh no, he might go off, you know," said I; "or some one might see him.
Besides, he'll be too stout to go under."

"Bother!--where can he go, then?"

"I vote we stick him in the lumber room under the gymnasium.  Nobody
ever goes there, and you can get into it any time by the area outside,"
said Coxhead.

This was voted an excellent idea.  At any rate, if he was discovered or
did go off there, the gymnasium was far enough away from Sharpe's.

So, with much rejoicing, the guy was duly loaded with his explosive
internals, and clad in an old derelict overcoat of some late senior.  My
famous hat adorned his hideous head, and my unappreciated tan boots lent
distinction to his somewhat incoherent legs.  A train of touch-paper
connected with a Roman candle was cunningly devised to protrude in the
form of a tongue from his mouth, while ginger-beer bottles filled with
gunpowder served as hands.  And the whole work of art was one dark
evening conveyed by me tenderly and deposited among a wilderness of
broken forms, empty hampers, and old bottles in the lumber room under
the school gymnasium, "to be called for" in a few days time.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

GUNPOWDER TREASON.

One result of my boating excursion was that Crofter ceased to frequent
his fellow-seniors' studies.  There was no declaration of war, or,
indeed, any formal breaking off of relations.  But Crofter had sense
enough of his own dignity to feel that he had been slighted by Tempest:
and Tempest and his friends had no inclination to heal the trouble, or
assume an attitude of friendliness they did not feel.

As for me, I found it very hard to steer an even course between the
competing parties.  Crofter nodded and spoke to me just as usual, and
was evidently amused by my panic lest these pacific overtures should be
observed or misconstrued by Tempest.  Tempest, on the other hand, did
not refer again to the subject, but took a little more pains than before
to look after me and help me in my work.  And an evening or two later,
much to my surprise, when I went as usual to "tidy up" in Pridgin's room
while Tempest was there too, my lord and master said abruptly,--

"Let my things alone, kid.  Tempest appreciates a mess in his place more
than I do, so I've swopped you for Trimble."

"What?" said I, in tones of mingled amazement and pleasure.  "Am I--"

"You're to go and fetch my blazer," said Tempest, "that I left on the
parallel bars in the gymnasium this afternoon.  Look alive, or I shall
stick to Trimble."

I really began to think there must be something unusually desirable
about me, that fellows should be so anxious to possess me.  The
Philosophers had with one accord sought me for president.  Pridgin had
wanted me.  Crofter had wanted me.  Even Redwood had wanted me.  And now
here was old Tempest putting in his claim!  He should have me--I would
not be so selfish as to deprive him of the coveted privilege.

In a somewhat "tilted" condition I went off on my errand, not even
delaying to announce the great news to my fellow-Philosophers.  It was a
dark evening, and the gymnasium was some way off.  But I knew the way by
this time.  I had daily walked past the area door and glanced down at
the dangerous guy where it lay with its lolling tongue under the
grating, to assure myself of its welfare.  It was all right up till now,
and in two days it would be off my hands.

The square was empty as I crossed it, and, to my satisfaction, I found
the gymnasium door unlocked.  I groped my way to the corner where the
parallel bars stood, and there found the blazer, which I carried off in
triumph.

As I emerged from the door and came down the steps, I became aware of
two points of light in front of me, and a voice out of the darkness,
which caused me to jump almost out of my skin,--

"Who is that?"

It was Mr Jarman's voice--and I could just discern his shadowy form
accompanied by that of Mr Selkirk standing before me.  The two masters
were evidently taking an after-dinner turn with their cigars, and had
heard my footsteps.

"Jones iv., sir; I came to fetch Tempest's blazer."

"Who gave you leave?"

"Tempest, sir."

"Take the blazer back where you found it, and tell Tempest if he leaves
his things in the gymnasium he must fetch them at proper hours.  This is
the third time I have had to speak to you, Jones iv.  You must attend an
extra drill to-morrow, and learn fifty lines by heart.  This constant
irregularity must be stopped."

So saying, he took his companion's arm and strolled off.

I returned dismally into the dark gymnasium and flung the blazer on to
the nearest seat; and then hurried back to report the result of my
mission to Tempest.

As I guessed, our poor guy downstairs was likely to be nowhere in the
explosion which this last insult called forth.

With clenched teeth Tempest sprang from his seat and snatched his cap.

"It's awfully dark," said I; "if you're going, you'd better take some
matches."

"Fetch me some," said he, with a harsh, dry voice.  I fled off, and
returned with a box of fusees, which the Philosophers had laid in for
the approaching celebration of Guy Fawkes' Day.

Tempest snatched them from my hand and strode off.  I wished he had let
me go with him.  I heard his footsteps swing heavily across the
quadrangle, as if challenging the notice of the enemy.  Whether the
enemy heard or answered the challenge I could not say.  The steps died
away into silence, and I listened in vain for further sign.

Presently I returned to the faggery, where the Philosophers were just
preparing to obey the summons to bed.

Hurriedly I recited the event of the evening, and for once was honoured
with their rapt and excited attention.

"My eye, what a shame we can't go out and see the fun!" cried Langrish.

"I hope he makes jelly of him," said Trimble.  "I'm jolly glad I'm his
fag."

This brought on a crisis I had rather feared.

"You're not," said I.  "Pridgin has swopped me for you."

"What!" screamed Trimble, taking a running kick at my shins.

"I didn't do it.  Shut up.  Trim! that's my leg you're kicking.  It was
Pridgin.  Go and kick him," said I.

But Trim was in no mood to listen to reason.

"I always said you were a sneak," snarled he; "now I know it.  Come and
kick the beast, you fellows.  It's all a low dodge.  Kick him, I say."

The company showed every disposition to respond to the appeal.

"Look here," said I, "it's not my fault--but if you kick me, I'll tell
him about your precious guy, and you can look after him yourself; I
shan't.  There!"

This rather fetched them.  As custodian of that illicit effigy I had my
uses, and they hardly cared to dispense with me.  So Trimble was ordered
not to make an ass of himself, and the discussion went back to Tempest
and his blazer.

"I tell you what," said Warminster.  "I vote we hang about a bit and
cheer him when he comes in.  There's no one to lag us for not going to
bed, and we may as well stay and back him up."

With which patriotic resolve we resumed our seats and occupied the
interval with auditing the accounts of the club--a painful and tedious
operation which gave rise to much dispute and recrimination,
particularly when it was discovered that on paper we were 25 shillings
to the good, whereas in the treasurer's pocket we were 6 shillings to
the bad.

The treasurer had a bad quarter of an hour of it, till it was discovered
that the auditors had accidentally forgotten to carry the total of one
column to the top of the next, an oversight which nearly brought about
the dissolution of the club, so fierce was the storm which raged over
it.

More than half an hour was spent over these proceedings, and we began to
wonder why Tempest had not come back.  It was certain he must have been
stopped by somebody, or he would have been back in ten minutes.  Had he
and Jarman had an encounter?  Was Mr Jarman at that moment begging for
quarter? or was our man answering for his riot to the head master?

Half an hour passed, three-quarters, an hour.  Then, just as we were
giving him up, hurried footsteps came across the quadrangle, and
Tempest, with pale face and disordered guise, carrying his blazer on his
arm, entered and passed rapidly to his room.  His countenance was too
forbidding for us to venture on our promised cheer.  Something unusual
had happened.  How we longed to know what it was!

I was thrust forward to follow him to his study, on the chance of
ascertaining, and was on the point of obeying, when a terrific sound
broke the silence of the night, and sent us back with white, rigid faces
in a heap into the faggery.

The sound proceeded from the direction of the gymnasium--first of all, a
dull, spasmodic thunder; then a fierce burst, followed almost
immediately by two tremendous reports which shook us to the soles of our
boots.

It reminded me of that fearful night at Dangerfield, when Tempest--

I clung on to Langrish, who was next to me, in mute despair, and
Langrish in turn embraced Trimble.

"Those," gasped the voice of Coxhead, "were the--ginger--beer--bottles.
What--shall--we--do?"

"Cut to bed sharp!" said the resolute though quavering voice of
Warminster, "and lie low."

"There won't be much of him left," whispered Trimble, "that's one good
thing," as we huddled off our clothes in the dark in the dormitory.

It was a gleam of comfort, certainly.  Effigies of that kind, when they
do go off, leave few marks of identity behind them.

"Who let it off?"  I ventured to ask.  "No one knew about it except us."

"Look out!  There's somebody coming!"

It was Mr Sharpe, who looked in, candle in hand, to see if any one had
been disturbed by the noise.  But every one was sleeping peacefully,
blissfully unconscious that anything had happened.

"Narrow shave that," said Langrish, when the master had retired.

"I say," said Trimble.  "I wonder if Tempest--"

Here he pulled up, but a muffled whistle of dismay took up his meaning.

"If he did, he must have found it out by himself.  I never said a word
to him," said I.

"You were bound to make a mess of it," said Coxhead.  "Why ever couldn't
you stick the thing where nobody could find it?"

"So I did; it was leaning up against the cellar wall; no one could
possibly get at it."

"Why not? the area door's open."

"No, it ain't.  I locked it, and hid the key," said I, triumphantly,
"for fear of accident, under the scraper."

"Good old Sarah--that's lucky.  But what about the grating in the
gymnasium floor?  Couldn't you twig it through that?"

"Not unless you were looking for it.  And if you could, you couldn't get
at it."

"Well," said Trimble, rather brutally, "I hope it's all right, for your
sake.  Fellows who keep guys must take the consequences.  It would have
been much safer if you'd kept it under your bed."

"You may keep the next," growled I.  "I've done with it."

Considering the probable condition of the luckless effigy at that
moment, nobody was inclined to contradict me; and the Philosophers
relapsed into gloomy silence, and eventually fell asleep.

I was probably the last to reach that blissful stage.  For hours I lay
awake, a prey to the most dismal reflections.  To do myself justice, my
own peril afflicted me at the time--perhaps because I did not realise
it--less than Tempest's.  Whether he had blown up the guy or not, things
would be sure to look black against him, and my recollection of the
episode of Hector's death told me he would come out of it badly.  How,
if he had done it, he had contrived to get at the explosives, I could
not fathom.  I was sure, even with his grudge against Jarman, he was not
the sort of fellow to take a revenge that was either mean or dastardly;
and yet--and yet--and yet--

When with one accord we woke next morning it needed no special
intimation to be aware that something had happened at Low Heath.
Masters and school attendants were talking in groups in the quadrangle.
Boys were flitting across in the direction of the gymnasium; and seniors
in twos and threes were deferring their morning dip and hovering about
in serious confabulation.

"Something up?" said Trimble, with ill-concealed artlessness.  "I wonder
what it is?"

"Looks like a row of some sort," said Langrish.  "What are all the chaps
going across to the gym. for, I wonder?"

"Let's go and see," said Coxhead.

"We needn't all go together," said Warminster, significantly.  So one by
one, casually, and at studied distances from our comrades, the
Philosophers dropped into the crowd and made for the scene of last
night's accident.

I felt terribly nervous.  Suppose some one had been killed, or suppose
the gymnasium had been burnt, and suspicion fell on any one, what a fix
it would be!

In my distress I met Dicky Brown, full of news.

"Hullo, Jones, I say, have you heard?  Some chap's been trying to blow
up the gym. in the night, and there's a row and a half on.  The front
door is smashed, and the floor all knocked to bits.  Come and have a
look."

"Any one killed or hurt?"

"I've not heard.  Didn't you hear the noise?"

"Yes.  Our chaps heard a row in the night."

"We could hear it at our place," said Brown.  "They say the chap's known
who did it, too."

"Who?"

"How do I know?  Some chap who's been extra drilled, most likely."

"There's plenty of them," suggested I.

"Well, yes.  They say a lot of gunpowder had been stowed in the lumber
room just under the door.  There, do you see?"

We had reached the scene of the tragedy, and I was able to judge of the
mischief which had been done.  The door was broken, but whether by the
explosion or ordinary violence it was hard to say.  The floor and
grating over the lumber room were broken away, and one or two windows
were smashed.  That was all.  My first feeling was one of relief that
the damage was so slight.  I had pictured the whole building a wreck,
and a row of mangled remains on stretchers all round.  Compared with
that, our poor guy had really made a very slight disturbance.  Of him I
was thankful to be able to observe no trace, except one tan boot and a
fragment of a ginger-beer bottle in the area.  That indeed was bad
enough, but, I argued, the lumber room was full of old cast-off shoes
and bottles, and these would probably be set down as fragments of the
rubbish displaced by the explosion.

Brown, however, and others to whom I spoke, failed to share my view of
the slightness of the damage.

"If the fellow's found, it will be a case of the police court for him."

The blood left my face as I heard the awful words.  It had never
occurred to me yet that the matter was one of more than school concern.
Visions of penal servitude and a broken-hearted mother swam before my
eyes.  Oh, why had I ever left the tranquil seclusion of Fallowfield for
this awful place?

As soon as possible I edged quietly out of the crowd, and made my way
dismally back to Sharpe's, where I met not a few of our fellows, all
eager for news.

I was too sick to give them much information, and sent them to inspect
for themselves while I made my way dismally to Tempest's room.

He was up, reading.

"Hullo, youngster," said he, "what's all the row about?  What was that
noise in the quad, last night? were some of your lot fooling about with
fireworks?"

"Don't you know?" gasped I, fairly taken aback with the question.  "Why,
some one's been trying to blow up the gymnasium!"

"What!" he exclaimed.  "Why, _I_ was there, not long before the noise.
Who's done it?"

"That's what nobody knows.  I'm afraid there'll be a row about it."

"Any fool could tell that," said Tempest, with troubled face.

"I wish you hadn't been there," said I; "they may think it was you."

"Let them," said he, with a laugh which was anything but merry.  I was
longing to hear what had happened to him last night, but he did not
volunteer any information, and I did not care to question him.

Horribly uneasy, I was about to seek the questionable consolations of my
comrades, when the school messenger entered with a long face.

"Master Tempest, the head master wants to see you at once."

"All right," said Tempest.

"He said I was to bring you."

"If you want to carry me, you may," said Tempest, with a short laugh;
"if not, wait a moment and I'll come.  Jones, tell Pridgin I want to
speak to him--wait, I'll go to him."

The school messenger looked as if he felt it his duty to take the senior
at his word.  Had Tempest been a smaller boy, he might have done so.  As
it was, he repeated,--

"At once, please, sir."

Tempest took no notice, but went across the passage to his friend's
room.

When he reappeared in a minute or two, Pridgin was with him, and without
taking further notice of the messenger's presence the two walked arm-in-
arm out of the house and across the quadrangle.

The news of the summons spread like wildfire.  The Philosophers, when in
due time they mustered in the faggery after their inspection of the
scene of the outrage, were not slow in taking in the seriousness of the
situation.

"Of course he's suspected.  It's all your fault, you ass, for being such
a muff and letting Jarman catch you.  You can't do a thing without
making a mess of it."

"How could I help it?"  I pleaded.

"Couldn't you have fetched his blazer for him without running into that
cad's way?"

"What I can't make out," said Langrish, "is how Tempest knew about the
guy and was able to let it off."

"I don't believe he did," said I.  "I'm sure he didn't."

"You'd believe anything.  Things like that don't go off by themselves,
do they?"

I was bound to admit they did not, but persisted in my belief that
Tempest had nothing to do with it.

But the logic of the Philosophers was irresistible.

"Didn't we see him go over and come back? and didn't it blow up the
moment he got into the house?" said Trimble.

"And didn't he go over on purpose to have it out with Jarman?" said
Coxhead.

"And hadn't he got his blazer with him when he came back?--so he must
have been in the gym.," said Warminster.

"Who else was likely to do it?" said Langrish.  "I suppose you'll try to
make out Jarman tried to blow himself up?"

"I never said so.  All I said was that I'm positive Tempest never did
it."

"And all we say is that you're about as big an ass as you look, and
that's saving a good deal," chimed in the Philosophers.

How long the wrangle might have gone on I cannot say.  For just then the
school messenger appeared on the scene once more--this time in quest of
me.

"Young Master Jones iv., you're to go to the head master at once."

"What for?" said I, feeling a cold shudder go down my spine.

"Ask a policeman," replied the ribald official.  "You've had a short
time and a merry one, my young gentleman; but it's over at last."

"But I never--"

"Sharp's the word!" interrupted he.

"You'd better cut," said the Philosophers.  "We'll give you a lift if we
can."

It was poor consolation, but such as it was I valued it.  Never a criminal
walked to the gallows with as heavy a heart as I followed the school
messenger across the quadrangle and past the fated gymnasium to the head
master's study.

There I found four people waiting to see me.  Tempest looking very
sullen, the head master looking very grave, Mr Jarman looking very
vicious, and a policeman looking very cheerful.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

BEFORE THE "BEAK."

At the sight of the policeman I gave myself up for lost.  The sins and
errors of my youth all rose in a hideous procession before me.  I
recalled vividly the occasion when, years ago, I had borrowed Dicky
Brown's "nicker" without acknowledgment, and lost it.  I recalled a
dismal series of assaults and libels in my guardian's office.  I
recollected with horror once travelling on a half-ticket two days after
my twelfth birthday.  Above all, the vision of that ill-favoured effigy
under the grating rose gibbering and mocking me to my face, and claiming
me for penal servitude, if not for the gallows itself.

How well I remember every detail of that scene as I entered the doctor's
study!  The bust of Minerva looking askance at me from above the book-
case; the quill in the doctor's hand with its fringe all on end;
Tempest's necktie crooked and showing the collar stud above; Mr
Jarman's eye coldly fixed on me; and the policeman, helmet in hand,
standing with his large boots on the hearthrug, the picture of content
and prosperity.

"Jones," said the doctor, "we have sent for you to tell us what you did
at the gymnasium last night.  You were there, I understand, after dark?"

I looked first at the doctor, then at Tempest.  I would have given
worlds to be able to have two minutes' conversation with him, and
ascertain what he wished me to say, if indeed he wished me to say
anything at all.  The memory of a similar dilemma at Dangerfield only
served to confuse me more, and make it impossible to decide how I should
act now; while the presence of the policeman drove from my head any
ideas that were ever there.  Would Tempest like me to say that I went
there at his bidding, and if not, how could I explain the matter?  I
wished I only knew what had been said already, so that at least I might
put my evidence on the right side.

"Yes, sir," said I, "I saw Mr Jarman there."

"What were you doing there, eh, young master?" said the policeman.

This was an unexpected attack from the flank of the battle for which I
was wholly unprepared.  I could have told the doctor, or even Mr
Jarman.  But to be questioned thus by a representative of the law was
too much for my delicate nerves.

"Really, it wasn't me," said I.  "I didn't do it, and don't know who
did.  I only went to get a blazer, and left it there directly Mr Jarman
told me to do so."

"A blazer?" said the policeman, with the air of a man who has made a
discovery.  "What sort of a thing is that?  A blazer?  Was it alight?"

Here Tempest laughed irreverently, much to the displeasure of the
policeman.  I was, however, thankful for the cue.

"What," said I, "don't you know what a blazer is?  Anybody knows that.
It's what you have in the fields."

"Come, young gentleman," said the officer, whom Tempest's laugh had put
on his dignity, "no prevaricating.  What were you doing with that there
blazer?"

"What was I doing with it?  Fetching it."

The policeman was evidently puzzled.  He wished he knew what a blazer
was, but in the present distinguished company did not like to show his
ignorance.

"That blazer must be produced," said he; "it'll be evidence."

I looked at Tempest, as the person best able to deal with the matter,
and said,--

"I left it in the gym.  Mr Jarman made me."

"How long was that before the explosion?  Was it alight when you left
it?"

"The blazer?  Oh no."

"A blazer," explained the head master blandly, "is a flannel jacket.  I
don't see what use it can be as evidence."

"I suppose," said Tempest jauntily, who was evidently recovering his
presence of mind, "he thought it was a lucifer match."

"You'll laugh on the wrong side of your face, young gentleman," said the
policeman wrathfully; "this here matter will have to be gone into.
There's been a party injured, and it'll be a matter for the magistrate.
You'll have to come along with me."

"I tell you," said Tempest, becoming grave once more, "I've had no more
to do with it than you have."

"And yet," said Mr Jarman, speaking for the first time, "the explosion
took place immediately after you were there, and when it was impossible
for any one else to be there."

"I say I know nothing at all about it," said Tempest shortly, "and I
don't care what you think."

"Come, Tempest," said Dr England, "no good will be gained by losing
temper.  It is very necessary to get to the bottom of this business,
especially as some one has been injured.  It seems almost impossible the
explosion could have happened by accident; at the same time, knowing
what I do of you, I do not myself believe that you are the boy who would
commit an outrage of this sort.  As the policeman intends to report the
affair to the magistrate, you had better go with him and let him
investigate the matter.  Don't do yourself injustice by losing your
temper.  Mr Jarman, your attendance will probably be necessary; and
Jones had better go too, although so far he has not thrown very much
light on the matter.  Constable, if you will take my compliments to
Captain Rymer and ask him when he can see us--"

"Beg pardon, sir," said the constable, evidently sore about the blazer,
"the young gent must come along with me now.  That's my duty, and I
can't take no instructions contrary."

"Very well," said the doctor stiffly; "we will go to Captain Rymer at
once."

"Hadn't you better handcuff me?" said Tempest, who appeared to be seized
with a wild desire to exasperate the man of the law.

The policeman glared as if he was disposed to take him at his word.

"None of your imperence, I can tell you, my beauty!" said he.  "I ain't
a-going to stand it--straight.  Come, stir yourself."

"It is not necessary," said the head master, "for you to come with us.
I give my word that we shall be at the police court immediately.  But I
wish to avoid the public scandal of one of my boys going through the
streets in charge."

"I ain't a-going to let him out of my sight," said the ruffled
constable.  "I know his style."

Tempest smiled provokingly.

"I'd sooner walk, sir," said he.  "If the policeman holds me on one side
and Mr Jarman on the other--"

"Silence, sir," said the doctor sternly, while Mr Jarman raised his
brows deprecatingly.

"Am I to come too?" said I.

"Yes."

"I should like Pridgin and some of the fellows to be there too, sir,"
said Tempest.  "They saw me just before and just after the explosion."

"It does not seem necessary to have more boys," said Mr Jarman.

"Not to you!" said Tempest hotly; "the fewer _you_ have the better.  But
if you choose to accuse me, I sha'n't ask you whom to have to speak for
me."

"Tempest," said the head master, "you are only doing yourself harm by
this.  Jones, go and fetch Pridgin, and any of the others he speaks of,
to the police court; and kindly do not say a word of what has passed
here.  Now, constable, are you ready?"

The school was fortunately all within doors at the time, so that, except
to the few who chanced to be gazing from the windows, the little
procession, headed by the doctor and Mr Jarman, with the policeman and
Tempest bringing up the rear, passed unobserved.

I was full of apprehensions.  Whatever the result, I knew Tempest well
enough to be sure that the effect on him would be bad, and would call
out in him all that spirit of insubordination and defiance which had
before now threatened to wreck his career.  A strong sense of
responsibility was all that had hitherto held it in check.  If that were
now shattered--and how could it help being upset by this charge?--it
would break out badly and dangerously.  I was not long in speeding over
to Sharpe's, where I found Pridgin just going over to class.

He heard the doctor's message with a groan of weariness.

"What's the use of my going?--_I_ can't tell them anything," said he.

"You can tell them Tempest never did it," said I.

"If they don't believe him, they won't me.  Anyhow, I am coming."
Thereupon I was inspired to tell him the secret history of the effigy of
Mr Jarman, and my theory as to the cause of the explosion; namely, that
Tempest might have dropped a match through the grating, not knowing on
what it would fall, and that in the natural perversity of things it had
lit on the projecting tongue of the guy.

"You'd better make a clean breast of that guy," said Pridgin, "if you
want to get Tempest out of this mess.  You'll probably get expelled or
flogged, but Low Heath can spare you better than it can Tempest.  It
strikes me you'd better fetch down one or two of your lot to corroborate
you.  It sounds too neat a story as it is."

Whereupon I sought out Langrish and Trimble, and had the satisfaction of
making their hair stand on end for once.  At first they flatly refused
to come, and reminded me that, as President of the Conversation Club,
the entire responsibility for the guy rested on me.

"All serene," said I, "only come and let them know how Jarman brought it
all on.  The more we go for him, the better for our man."

They failed to see the force of my logic, but curiosity and love of
adventure induced them to venture into the lion's den.  On our way,
moreover, we captured Dicky Brown, who, to do him credit, was only too
eager to come with us and stand by his old Dux.

Contrary to our expectations, when we arrived, instead of finding a
crowded court, we were ushered into the magistrate's parlour, where, to
judge by appearances, a comfortable little party was going on.

The captain, a cheery old boy, familiar to all Low Heathens for his
presence on speech day, sat at a table with his clerk beside him.  The
doctor and Mr Jarman were also sitting down, and Tempest was standing
restlessly near the window.  The lodge-keeper's son, with his head bound
up (for he was the victim of the explosion, and I suppose, the
prosecutor), was standing beside the policeman, cap in hand, on the mat.

At the sight of the three juniors the doctor frowned a little, and Mr
Jarman scowled.

"What are these boys doing here?" said the former.

"Please, sir, we thought you wanted to hear how it went off," said
Langrish.

"So we do," said the magistrate; "sit down, my lads.  We'll hear what you
have to say in time."

"Please, sir," said Tempest, "may I speak to Pridgin?"

"Certainly, my lad," said the captain again.

So the two friends hastily conferred together in the window, while we
stared round with an awestruck, and apparently disconcerting, gaze at
the gentlemen on the doormat, who severally represented the majesty of
the law and injured innocence.

"Now, then," said the magistrate presently, "let us hear what this is
all about.  One of your boys, doctor, I see, is charged with attempting
to blow up part of the school gymnasium last night, and injuring this
poor fellow here.  Who makes the charge, by the way?  Do you?"

"No," said the doctor, "I understand Mr Jarman does."

"Which is Mr Jarman?" said the captain, looking blandly round.  "Ah,
you.  Well, sir, this is a serious charge to make; _let_ us hear what
you have to say.  This is not a sworn examination, but what you say will
be taken down, and the boy you accuse will have a right to ask any
question.  Now, sir."

Mr Jarman, thereupon, with very bad grace, for he felt that the
magistrate's tone was not cordial, related how he was walking in the
court at such and such an hour, when he saw a boy attempting to enter
the gymnasium.  That he stopped him and demanded his name.  That the boy
pushed past him and entered the gymnasium.  Upon which Mr Jarman turned
the key on the outside in order to detain him there, by way of
punishment.  That the boy began to kick at the door, and after half an
hour broke it open and made his escape.  That the boy was Tempest, and
that scarcely two minutes after he had left, and just after Mr Jarman,
having stayed to examine the damage to the door, had turned to go away,
the explosion occurred; that he heard a cry from young Sugden, the
lodge-keeper's son, who was passing at the time, and was thrown
violently forward against the railings, cutting his head badly.

"How do you know the boy was Tempest?" asked the magistrate.

"I recognised him in the dark," said Mr Jarman.  "In fact, I expected
him."

"Expected him?"

"Yes, he had sent his fag for a jacket just previously, and I had sent
the fag back."

"Why?"

"Boys are not allowed to enter the gymnasium after dark."

"Is that a rule of the school?"

"It is my rule."

"Does it apply to senior boys as well as juniors?" asked Tempest.

"I am responsible for the gymnasium, and--"

"That is not the question," said the magistrate.  "Have you ever allowed
senior boys in the gymnasium after dark?"

"I may have; but I forbade Tempest to enter last night."

"What harm was there in his fetching his coat, if it was not against
rules?"

"It was against rules to go in when I told him not."

"Well, well," said Captain Rymer, "that is a matter that need not detain
us.  Have you any more questions, Mr Tempest?"

"Yes, please, sir.  You said you were expecting me, Mr Jarman.  What
made you do that?"

"I expected, from my knowledge of your conduct, that you would come and
try and get the blazer."

"When have I disobeyed you before?"

"You know as well as I do, Tempest."

"Yes, but I don't," said the magistrate.  "Answer the question."

Mr Jarman thereupon gave his version of the affair at Camp Hill Bottom.

"The offence being," said the magistrate, "that the boys, Tempest among
them, were out, on the afternoon of a holiday, half an hour from the
school, with only a one quarter of an hour to get back.  You punished
the boys, I understand."

"Yes."

"And Tempest took his punishment with the rest."

"Yes."

"I suppose it is a special indignity to a senior boy, captain of his
house, to be paraded for extra drill with a lot of small boys, eh, Dr
England?"

"I should consider it so," said the doctor.

"I did not feel myself called upon to make any difference," said Mr
Jarman.

"Apparently not.  And on account of this affair, you say you expected
Tempest would attempt to defy you last night?"

Mr Jarman bit his lips and did not reply.

Tempest resumed his questions with a coolness that surprised us.

"You were smoking, I think, Mr Jarman?"

"What if I was?"

"Nothing, only I wanted the magistrate to know it.  And you locked me
into the gymnasium for half an hour till I kicked myself out.  I say you
had no right to do that.  What did you do while I was inside?"

"I walked up and down."

"Did you try to stop me when I got out?"

"No."

"Why?" asked Tempest, with a sneer that made us all contrast his broad
shoulders with the master's slouch.

"I decided to deal with the matter to-day."

"How did you see what I had done to the door in the dark?"

"I saw by the light of a match."

"You say it was two minutes after I left that the explosion took place,
and immediately after you left?"

"That's what I said."

"And you were striking matches during the interval?"

"Yes."

"And yet you suggest that it was I who blew the place up?"

"I say it was suspicious, knowing your frame of mind and the passion you
were in at the time."

"How could I blow up the place without explosives?"

"There must have been some there already."

"He didn't know anything about that!  That was our affair, wasn't it,
you chaps?" blurted out Trimble.

"Rather," chimed in all of us.

The sensation in the court at this announcement may be better imagined
than described.

The magistrate put on his glasses and stared at us.  Mr Jarman looked
startled.  The doctor looked bewildered.

"You see, it was this way," said Trimble, who had been working himself
up to the point all through the previous cross-examination.  "We had--"

"Wait a moment, my boy," said the magistrate.  But the witness was too
eager to listen to the remark.

"It was this way.  We had a guy belonging to the Ph.C.C, you know, and
he was chock-full of fireworks.  We were keeping him for Guy Fawkes'
Day, you know.  You wouldn't have known he was Jarman (Mr Jarman, I
mean), to look at him, but he was, and Sarah, being president, offered
to look after him.  It was too big to stick under the bed, so--"

"So," continued I, "I thought the safest place to stick him would be in
the lumber room under the gym.; and I never thought any one would be
dropping matches through the grating on his touch-paper tongue.  Tempest
didn't know anything about it, and--"

"You see," said Langrish, taking up the parable, "we meant to keep it
dark, and only the Philosophers were in it; he had on Sarah's hat and
boots, and a top-coat we found somewhere about.  He'd have never gone
off of himself, and he wouldn't have done any harm on the Fifth, when we
should have hung and blown him up in the open.  Tempest--"

"Tempest," broke in Dicky Brown, putting in his oar, "isn't the kind of
chap to do a thing like that on purpose; and it must have been Mr
Jarman blew him up by mistake, with one of his matches or the end of a
cigar or something--"

"It was a mulish thing of Sarah to stick him there," said Trimble, "but
he knows no better, and thought it was all right.  So did we, and
Pridgin says it was quite an accident, sir, and--"

"And if any one's to get in a row," said I, "we'd better, because he was
our guy, and the mistake we made was letting his touch-paper tongue hang
out so far.  He'd have never blown up if it hadn't been for that."

Here there was a general pause for breath, and the magistrate, who
evidently had a sense of humour, said,--

"And pray who is Sarah, my man?"

"That's what they call me when they're fooling; it's not my real name,
really, sir.  Jones iv. is my real name."

"That's right," said Trimble; "he's only called Sarah because he looks
like it.  He's not more in it than the rest of us, because he only had
to take care of the guy because he was president.  We're all sorry the
tongue was made so long."

The magistrate did his best to look grave as he turned to Mr Jarman.

"Does this explanation help to clear up the mystery?"

Mr Jarman bit his lips and said,--

"If it is as they say, it may account for the explosion.  I certainly
dropped several matches through the grating."

"It is as we say, isn't it, you chaps?" said Langrish.  "We wouldn't
tell a cram about it."

"Rather not!" chimed we.

"Very well.  Then I don't see that I can do much good," said the
magistrate.  "Dr England will know better how to deal with the matter.
An accident is an accident after all; and if I may give an opinion,
these boys have done quite properly in coming here and telling all about
it.  Little boys should not be allowed to play with explosives.  At the
same time, you must allow me to say, Mr Jarman, that it is unfortunate
for a master to put himself in the position of being made the subject of
an effigy.  As for Tempest, there is absolutely nothing against him,
unless according to the rules of the school it is an offence for a boy
who is locked up in a dark room at night to do his best to get out.  It
is a great pity the matter was brought to me at all; but as it has been,
my advice is to let it rest where it is.  Meanwhile, this poor fellow
who has been injured has some claim, and I dare say this sovereign will
help get him the necessary bandages and plaster for his forehead.  Good
morning, Dr England; good morning, Mr Jarman.  Good day, my lads.  Let
this be a lesson against touch-paper tongues."  So ended the famous
affair of Mr Jarman's guy.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

GOING DOWN STREAM.

If any one supposed that Low Heath had heard the last of Mr Jarman's
guy they little knew Mr Jarman, or Tempest, or the Philosophers.  The
ghost of that unhappy effigy was hardly likely to be laid by a simple
magisterial decision.

Mr Jarman, it was rumoured, had a bad quarter of an hour with the
doctor that evening, and went about his ordinary work for the next few
days with a scowl which boded no good to any one who chanced to cross
him, least of all to those of us who had contributed to his defeat.

Tempest, on the other hand, took his victory coolly.  He talked it over
with his chums, and came to the conclusion that they were quits with the
enemy and could afford to leave him alone.  But it was plain to see that
he had suffered a jar, which found expression in his reckless unconcern
for the duties of his position as head of his house, and an increased
disinclination to make any exertion for the credit of a school which, he
considered, had treated him ill.  What troubled me most was to notice
that his spirits had flagged, and that he was dropping slowly into the
listless indifference which had made Pridgin only a term ago shirk his
responsibilities to the school.

Towards us juniors he was utterly easy-going, perhaps in token of his
gratitude for the assistance we had rendered him at a critical time; but
chiefly, I fear, because he was slack to check anything which seemed to
defy constituted authority or promised to give an uneasy time to the
representatives of law and order.

To do us credit, we availed ourselves of his licence to the uttermost.
Sharpe's rapidly became known as the "rowdy" house at Low Heath, and we
grew almost proud of the distinction.  Mr Sharpe, an amiable bookworm,
made periodical mild expostulations, which were always most
deferentially received, and most invariably neglected.

If any reader thinks (as we flattered ourselves at the time) that Mr
Jarman was the cause of all this state of things, let me tell him he is
as stupid as we young fools then were.

It's all very well to stand up for your rights, but the way to do it is
not by letting everything go wrong.  If poor old Tempest had taken a
bigger view of things, he would have seen that the way to pay Jarman out
was by making Sharpe's house the crack house of Low Heath in spite of
him.  But how hard it is to see just what the right thing is at the
time!  So I do not propose to throw stones at anybody, whatever the
reader may do.

The Philosophers of course duly entered a record of the transactions
just related in their minutes, the reading of which occupied the whole
of one of the extraordinary general meetings of their club.

One could never say what line Langrish would take up; and I as president
always had my qualms in calling upon him to read the minutes of the
previous meeting.

On the present occasion our meeting was held one half-holiday late in
the term, in mid-stream, on a barge which, in the course of a
"scientific" ramble, we found in a forlorn condition, about a mile above
Low Heath.  It was empty, and neither horse nor man nor boy was there to
betoken that it had an owner.

Being capacious, though dirty--for it was evidently in the habit of
carrying coal--it struck us generally that in the interests of
philosophy we should explore it.  The result being satisfactory, it was
moved and seconded and carried that the club hereby hold an
extraordinary meeting.

Objection was taken to the proximity of our meeting-place to the
bank--"in case some of the day louts should be fooling about," as
Warminster explained.  Thereupon, with herculean efforts, we shoved out
the stern across stream, the prow being still tethered; and catching on
to a stake, we had the satisfaction not only of feeling ourselves in an
unassailable position, but of knowing that we were effectually blocking
the river for any presumptuous wayfarer who wanted to go either up
stream or down.

After exploring the bunks and lockers and hold of the unsavoury vessel,
Trimble proposed that it would be best for the club to occupy seats on
the floor of the barge, where, quite invisible to any one on shore or
stream, we could hold our meeting undisturbed.

In a few introductory remarks, which were listened to with some
impatience, I explained that things had reached a critical state at Low
Heath.  It was the duty of everybody to back up Tempest and make it hot
for Jarman.  (Cries of "Why don't you?"  "What's the use of you?") We
didn't intend to be interfered with by anybody, and if Coxhead didn't
shut up shying bits of coal he'd get one for himself.  (Derisive cheers
from Coxhead, and more coal.)

Coxhead and I were both warm when, a quarter of an hour later, I resumed
the chair and called upon our excellent secretary to read the minutes,
which he accordingly did.

"Owing to the asinine mulishness of Sarah--" Here an interruption
occurred.

"Look here," said I, "you've got to drop that, Langrish.  I've told you
already I'm not going to stand it."

"Stand what?  Being called Sarah or an asinine mule?"

I explained that I was particularly referring to Sarah.

"Oh, all serene," said the secretary.  "We'll start again."

"Owing to the asinine mulishness of S--H, and three between--"

"No--that won't do," said I, fiercely.

"Owing to the asinine mulishness of--" here the speaker pointed at me
with his thumb--"of the asinine mule in the chair--"

I was weak enough to let this pass, and the applause with which it was
received quite carried the secretary off his feet.  When he got on them
again he resumed,--

"Jarman's guy was mulled all through.  Even Trimble couldn't have made a
bigger mess of it."

Here Trimble mildly interposed, but Langrish, who had hooked one arm
through a ring in the side of the vessel, and had a firm grip with his
feet up against a rib in front of him, was inflexible.

"A bigger mess of it," he repeated, when at last he was free to proceed.
"It was stuck just under the grating of the gym., and was neatly blown
up by Jarman at 8:15 on November 2.  The cost of the fireworks was four-
and-six, which the asinine mule, as it was his fault, is going to hand
over to the club, or know the reason why."

I said I would know the reason why.  Whereupon a long Socratic argument
ensued.

"Do you mean to say it wasn't your fault?" demanded Langrish.

"I couldn't tell Jarman would drop his cigar down."

"But if you'd tried you couldn't have stuck him in a better place."

"That's what I thought.  What have you got to growl at?"

"You offered to put it in a safe place."

"No, I didn't.  I didn't want to have it at all."

"But you did have it; you can't deny that."

"No--but--"

"Hold on.  And you stuck it there under the grating."

"Well, and if I did--"

"And that's how Jarman's cigar got on to it."

"Yes--but--"

"And that's how it blew up, wasn't it?  You haven't the cheek to say
that wasn't the way it blew up?"

"Of course it was; only--"

"Therefore, if you hadn't stuck it there it wouldn't have blown up.  You
can't deny that?"

"I don't say that.  What I say--"

"Therefore, it was you who blew it up; and it's you've got to pay for
the fireworks, Q.E.D.; and if you don't shut up, young Sarah, you'll get
your face washed."

I felt I was the victim of a very one-sided argument, but the popular
verdict was so manifestly in favour of the secretary, that I was
constrained to allow the point to pass.

"--reason why," resumed Langrish.  "There was a bit of a row, and the
doctor and some of the chaps were had up before the beak.  We got on all
serene till a howling chimpanzee whose name is Sarah--"

"There you are again," said I.  "I'll pay you now."

"What are you talking about?  I never mentioned you--did I, you chaps?"

"Rather not," chimed in the Philosophers assembled.

"Of course," said Langrish, "if whenever you hear of a howling
chimpanzee you think you're being referred to, we can't help it, can
we?"

The cheers which greeted this unanswerable proposition convinced me I
had given myself away for once.

"--howling chimpanzee, whose name's Sarah, put in his oar and spoilt the
whole thing."

"If it hadn't been for me," protested I, "you'd none of you have been
there at all."

"The magistrate," proceeded Langrish, not heeding the interruption,
"treated him with the contempt he deserved, and gave him a caution which
he'll remember to the end of his days."

"I don't remember it now," I growled.

"Turn him out for interrupting," shouted the secretary.

"You'd better not try," snarled I, preparing to contest my seat.  But
Langrish, eager to continue, went on,--

"The rest of us pulled Tempest through easy.  If Trim hadn't dropped his
'h's,' and--"

Here there was a real row.  Trim rose majestic and outraged, and hurled
himself on the secretary; and for a quarter of an hour at least, any
casual passer-by glancing at the apparently empty barge in mid-stream,
would have come to the conclusion that it was swaying from side to side
rather more violently than the force of the current seemed to warrant.

Trimble's "h's" took a long time to avenge, and by the time it was done
most of us were pretty much the colour of the coal-dust in which we had
searched for them.

Langrish was about to proceed with his luckless minutes when Warminster,
who had happened to peep above board for the sake of fresh air,
exclaimed,--

"Hullo, we're adrift!"

Instantly all hands were on board, and we discovered that our gallant
barge, probably during the last argument, had slipped her boathook at
the stern, and that the rope which held our prow had evidently been
slipped for us by a couple of youths wearing the town-boy ribbon, whom
we could descry at that moment strolling innocently up the towing-path,
apparently heedless of our existence.

The great lumbering barge was going down stream side on, about half-way
between either bank, at the breakneck speed of a mile an hour.  We had
lost our boathook, and had nothing whatever to navigate our craft with.
Worst of all, at the end of the long reach, coming to meet us, we could
see another barge, towed by a horse, which could certainly never pass up
in safety.

We were in for it, and had evidently nothing to do but peer, with our
grimy faces over the gunwale, at our impending doom.  About a hundred
yards off the men in charge of the opposition barge became aware of our
presence, and a hurried interchange of polite observations took place
between the skipper at the helm and the driver on the tow-path, the
result of which was that their tow-rope was cast off and hauled ashore;
and man and horse, accompanied by a dangerous-looking dog, advanced at a
quick pace to meet us.

The rope was hurriedly gathered up in a coil and thrown across our bows,
and we were invited to hitch the loop at the end over the hook on our
front thwart.  The horse was then put in motion, and the downward career
of our ark suffered an abrupt check, as we found ourselves rudely lugged
in towards the bank.

The situation was an awkward one, for not only was the skipper of the
opposition barge landed, and awaiting us with an uncomplimentary
eagerness on the bank, but the driver, whip in hand, was standing beside
him, and the dog, showing his teeth, beside him.

"Kotched yer, are we?" said the former, with a deplorable profuseness of
unnecessary verbiage, as he jumped on board.  "We tho't as much.  Lend
me that there whip, Bill."

"You tip 'em over, Tom; I'll make 'em jump."

Escape was impossible.  Our exits were in the hands of the enemy.  We
made one feeble attempt to temporise.

"We're sorry," said I, in my capacity as spokesman.  "We didn't know it
was your boat, really."

"You knows it now," said the proprietor.  "Over you go, or I'll 'elp
yer."

What! was it a case of being pitched overboard?  We looked round
desperately for hope, but there was none.  We might by a concerted
action have tackled one man, but the other on the bank, with the whip
and the dog, was a formidable second line to carry.  It needed all our
philosophy to sustain us in the emergency.

"Come, wake up," shouted the man.  "'Ere, Tike, come!"

Whereupon, to our terror, the dog leapt up on to the barge, and jumped
yapping in our midst.

"T'other side, if _you_ please," said the bargee, as I prepared dismally
to take my header on the near side.  "Wake 'im up, Tike!"

I needed no waking up; and giving myself up for lost, bounded to the
other side of the barge, and made a floundering jump overboard.  Luckily
for us the Low Heathens could swim to a man, and if all that we were in
for was to swim round that hideous barge and get ashore, we should have
been easily out of it.  But we had yet to reckon with the man and the
whip, who in his turn made every preparation to reckon with us.

I was the first to taste his mettle.  He had me twice before I could get
clear, and I seem to feel it as I write.  One by one the luckless and
dripping Philosophers ran the gauntlet of that fatal debarkation, which
was by no means alleviated by the opprobrious hilarity of our two
castigators and the delighted yappings of Tike.

At last it was all over, and, dripping and smarting, we collected our
shattered forces a quarter of a mile down the towing-path, and hastily
agreed that as a meeting-place for Philosophers a barge was not a
desirable place.  It was further agreed, that if we could catch the day
boys who were the source of all our woes (for if our barge had not been
let adrift, we could have sheered off in time), we would do to them as
we had been done by.

By good or ill luck, we had scarcely arrived at this important decision
when a defiant shout from a little hill among the trees close by
apprised us that we were not the only occupants of the river bank; and
worse still, that whoever the strangers were, they must have been
witnesses of our recent misfortunes--a certainty which made us feel
anything but friendly.

"Who are they?" said Langrish.

"Suppose it's those Urbans," said Coxhead.  "I heard they were going to
excavate somewhere this way."

"I vote we go and see," said Trimble, who was evidently smarting not a
little.

So we went and saw, and it was even as Coxhead had surmised; for as we
approached, shouts of--

"Who got licked with a whip?"

"What's the price of beauty?"

"Why don't you dry your clothes?" fell on our ears.

"Yah--we dare you to come down and have your noses pulled!" shouted we.

"We dare you to come up and have your hair curled!" shouted they.

We accepted the invitation, and stormed the hill.  The battle was short
and sharp.  We were fifteen to ten, and had a grievance.  I found myself
engaged with Dicky Brown, who, though he did himself credit, was
hampered by a satchelful of stones, which he fondly hoped might turn out
to be fossils, on his back.  I grieve to say I made mincemeat of Dicky
on this occasion.  In a few minutes the hill was ours, and the enemy in
full retreat.

We remained a short time to celebrate our victory, and then adjourned to
the school, a little solaced in our spirits.

The day's troubles, however, were not over, for at the door of Sharpe's
house, reinforced by half a dozen recruits, stalked the Urbans,
thirsting for reprisals, and longing to wipe out scores.

Then ensued a notable battle.  We failed to dislodge the enemy by a
forward attack, and for some time it seemed as if our flank movements
would be equally unsuccessful.  At length, by a great effort, we
succeeded in cutting off a few of them from the main body, and were
applying ourselves to the task of annihilating the rest when Tempest
appeared on the scene.

He looked fagged and harassed, and was evidently not much interested in
our battle.  A row was now too common a thing in Sharpe's to be an
event, and he allowed it to proceed with complete unconcern.

Just, however, as he was turning to enter the house, Mr Jarman came up.

It was almost the first time we had met officially since our encounter
in the magistrate's room, and as with one accord we ceased hostilities
and stared at him, one or two of the more audacious of our party
indulged in a low hiss.

"Come in, you fellows, at once," said Tempest, turning on his heel.

"Wait, you boys," said Mr Jarman, taking out his pencil.  "Wait,
Tempest."

But Tempest did not wait, nor did we, but made a deliberate rush into
our house, and in less than a minute were safely stowed away in our
several studies, secure from all immediate arrest.

It was an act of open rebellion such as Sharpe's had not yet ventured
on.  There was no excuse that any of us had not heard the order.  We
had, and had disobeyed it.  And in the present instance Tempest had
headed us.  What would be the consequence?

We were not destined to know till next morning, when a notice appeared
on the board stating that Mr Sharpe's house having been reported for
riotous conduct and disobedience to orders, the head master would meet
the boys in the hall at eleven o'clock.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

HALTING BETWEEN TWO OPINIONS.

There was no mistaking the doctor's meaning this time.  Sharpe's had had
a long rope, but had come to the end of it at last.  I would not for the
world have confessed it at the time, but I was half glad a crisis had
come.  My conscience had smitten me more than once about my work.  I had
fooled away the good chance with which I had entered Low Heath.  Fellows
far below me in scholarship had got ahead of me by force of steady
plodding, while I was wasting my time.  The good resolutions which I had
brought up with me had one by one fallen overboard, and I had been
content enough to take my place among the rowdies without an effort.

I had counted all through on Tempest's backing up.  If he had been keen
on the credit of the house, I felt I could have been so too.  If he had
been down on me for my neglect of work, I felt I should have stuck to
it.  As it was, slackness reigned supreme.  Tempest was slack because he
was out of humour.  Pridgin was slack because he was lazy.  Wales was
slack because he wanted to be in the fashion.  And all of us were slack
because our betters set us the example.  It needs no little courage for
a single boy to attempt to stem the drift of slackness in a school
house.  A dull, dogged boy like Dicky Brown might have done it; but I
could not afford to be peculiar, and therefore succumbed, against my
judgment, to the prevalent dry rot.

Now that a crisis had come I hoped Tempest might, if not for his own
sake, for ours, pull up, and take his house in hand, as he well could do
if he chose.  A short conversation I overheard as I was fagging in his
study that morning, however, was not encouraging.

"What's it to be," said Wales, "a lecture or a row?"

"A row, I hope," said Tempest wearily.

"What's wrong, old chap?" asked Pridgin.

"Nothing.  Out of curl, that's all," said Tempest, trying to assume a
laugh.

"You're not going to cave in to Jarman at this time of day," said Wales,
"are you?"

"Do you think it likely?" said Tempest.

"I tell you what I don't like," said Pridgin presently; "that's the way
Crofter's lately taken to do the virtuous."

"That's not the worst of him," said Wales; "but he's been chumming up
with Jarman.  I've met them twice lately walking together."

"I suppose he's got his eye on the headship of the house," said Tempest,
"when I get kicked out."

"Look here, old chap," responded Pridgin, looking really anxious, "it's
not to come to that, surely.  It would be intolerable to have him over
us.  Come what will, you must stick to us."

"All very well," said Tempest dismally; "that's England's affair more
than mine.  If knuckling under to Jarman is a condition, I'm out of it,
and Crofter is welcome to it."

This was all; and it was bad enough.  When the summons to assemble in
hall came, I went there in a state of dejection, feeling that the fates
were all against me, and that the new leaf I hoped for was several pages
further on yet.

My fellow-Philosophers, I regret to say, neither shared in nor
appreciated my forebodings.

"Look at that ass Sarah, trying to look virtuous," said Trimble.  "Just
like him, when there's a row on."

"I'm not trying to look virtuous," said I; "I'm sick of all these rows,
though."

"Pity you aren't sick when you're getting us into them, instead of
after.  You know you've been at the bottom of every row there's been on
this term."

This sweeping statement was not calculated to allay my discomfort.

"Don't tell lies," said I.

"No more we are.  Who got us into that mess at Camp Hill Bottom?  Sarah
did.  Who landed us in the row about Jarman's guy?  Old Sarah.  Who
played the fool with that barge and got us all licked?  Cad Sarah.  Who
started the shindy last night that's fetched us all in here?  Lout
Sarah.  Who's going to be expelled?  Howling Sarah.  And who'll be a
jolly good riddance of bad rubbish?  Chimpanzee Sarah.  There you are.
Make what you like of it, and don't talk to us."

This tirade took my breath away.  I knew it said more than it meant.
Still, it wasn't flattering, and it taxed my affection sorely to sit
quietly and hear it out.  But, somehow, to-day I was too anxious and
worried to care much what anybody said.

Fortunately the entrance of the doctor, Mr Sharpe, and Mr Jarman, made
further discussion for the time being unnecessary--and a gloomy silence
fell over the assembly.

Dr England was evidently worried.  Secretly, I believe, he was bored
by the whole affair, and wished Mr Sharpe and his prefects could manage
the affairs of their own house.  Perhaps, too, the fact that Mr Jarman
was once more the complainant had something to do with his lack of
humour.

"Now, boys," said he, "this is an unusual and unpleasant interview, and
I heartily wish it were not necessary.  When a whole house is reported
for rowdiness, it shows, I'm afraid, that the sense of duty to the
school is in a bad way.  This is not the first occasion this term on
which this house has been reported, but I have previously refrained from
interfering, in the hope that the good feeling of the boys themselves
would assert itself and make any action of mine unnecessary.  I am sorry
it has not been so.  As to the scrimmage in the quadrangle yesterday, I
am not disposed to make too much of that; at any rate, that weighs less
with me than what I understand to have been a deliberate act of
disobedience to the master, who quite properly interfered to restore
order; disobedience, I am sorry to say, encouraged, if not instigated,
by the head boy of the house.  I hope there may be some mistake about
this.  Will the boys who were engaged in the fight stand up?"

The Philosophers rose to a man, with a promptitude which was almost
aggressive.  Bother it all, why should we be backward in admitting that
we had gone for those day boys, and "put them to bed" for once?

"I ask you boys to say whether you heard Mr Jarman tell you to wait
till he spoke to you?"

"I did, sir," said Langrish.

"So did I," said Trimble.

"We all did," said I.

"And why did you not obey?"

"Tempest told us to come in, so we did," said I.

"That's right, sir," said Coxhead.

And the others assented.

"Very well," said the doctor.  "Tempest, I ask you to say whether you
heard Mr Jarman tell the boys to wait?"

"Yes, sir."

"And did you tell them, in spite of that, to come in?"

"Yes, sir."

"Why?"

"Because I'm head of the house, and I'm responsible for the order of my
house."

"I am glad to hear you think so," said the doctor drily.  "Have you
always been equally jealous for the order of your house this term,
Tempest?"

This was a "facer," as we all felt.  Tempest flushed and glanced up at
the head master.

"No, sir, I have not," he said.

The doctor was a chivalrous man, and did not try to rub in a sore.
Tempest had made a damaging admission against himself, and might be left
alone to his own sense of discomfort.

Unluckily, however, Mr Jarman stood by, and the matter could hardly be
allowed to drop.

"As regards the incident last night," said the doctor, "you know quite
well, all of you, that no boy, even the head of his house, has the right
to set his authority against that of a master.  Your conduct was an
insult to him, and requires an apology.  These small boys may have
considered they were not doing wrong in obeying you.  Tempest, but you
can plead no such ignorance.  I expect you to apologise to Mr Jarman."

A struggle evidently passed through Tempest's mind.  His conscience had
been roused by what the doctor had said, and his manner of saying it.
Had the apology been demanded for any one else but Mr Jarman, he could
have given it, and in one word have put himself on the side of duty.
But apologise to Jarman!  "If Mr Jarman wants me to tell a lie," said
he, slowly, "I'll say I'm sorry.  I can't apologise to him."

"Come, Tempest," said the doctor, evidently disconcerted at this
threatened difficulty, "you must be aware of the consequences, if you
refuse to do this."

"I know, sir, but I can't help it.  I can't apologise to Mr Jarman."

Dead silence followed, broken only by the hard breathing of the
Philosophers.  The doctor twirled the tassel of his cap restlessly.  Mr
Sharpe looked straight before him through his glasses.  Mr Jarman
stroked his moustache and smiled.  Tempest stood pale and determined,
with his eyes on the floor.

"I shall not prolong this scene," said the doctor at last.  "For the
remaining week of this term the boys concerned in yesterday's
disturbance are forbidden to appear in the playing fields.  You,
Tempest, will have a day to think over your determination.  Come to me
in my house this time to-morrow."

"I'd sooner it were settled now," said Tempest respectfully and
dismally.  "I cannot apologise."

"Come to me this time to-morrow," repeated the doctor.  "As to the other
boys of the house, I want you to understand that you are all concerned
in the wellbeing of your house.  If, as I fear, a spirit of
insubordination is on foot, and your own proper spirit and loyalty to
the school is not enough to stamp it out, I must use methods which I
have never had to use yet in Low Heath.  It may need courage and self-
sacrifice in a boy to stand up against the prevailing tone, but I trust
there is some of that left even in this misguided house.  Now dismiss."

It had been a memorable interview.  The doctor might have stormed and
raged, and done nothing.  As it was, he had talked like a quiet
gentleman, and made us all thoroughly ashamed of ourselves.

And yet, as we all of us felt, everything now depended on Tempest.  If
he surrendered he might count on us to fall in line and make up to him
for all he had sacrificed on our behalf.  If he held out, and refused
his chance, we _too_ refused ours and went out with him!  If only any
one could have brought home to him how much depended on him!

Yet who could blame him for finding it impossible to apologise to
Jarman, who had persecuted him all the term with a petty rancour which,
so far from deserving apology, had to thank Tempest's moderation that it
did not receive much rougher treatment than it had?  He might go through
the words of apology, but it would be a farce, and Tempest was too
honest to be a hypocrite.

There was unwonted quiet in Sharpe's house that afternoon.  Fellows were
too eagerly speculating as to the fate in store for them to venture on a
riot.  The Philosophers, of course, stoutly advocated a policy of "no
surrender"; but one or two of us, I happened to know, would have been
unfeignedly glad to hear that Tempest had squared matters with his
pride, and left himself free to take our reform in hand.

Tempest himself preserved a glum silence until after afternoon chapel,
when he said to me,--

"Isn't this one of Redwood's evenings, youngster?  I'll go with you if
you're going."

The Redwoods had given me an open invitation to drop in any Thursday
evening to tea and bring a friend.  I had been several times with Dicky,
and once, in great triumph, had taken Tempest as my guest.  It had been
a most successful experiment.  Not only had Tempest taken the two little
girls (and therefore their mother) by storm, but between him and Redwood
had sprung up an unexpected friendship, born of mutual admiration and
confidence.  Since then he had once repeated the visit, and to-night, to
my great satisfaction, proposed to go again.

To me it was a miniature triumph to carry off the hero of Sharpe's from
under the eyes of his house, and on an occasion like the present, to a
destination of which he and I alone knew the secret.

I flattered myself that, in spite of their mocking comments, the
Philosophers were bursting with envy.  It is always a rare luxury to be
envied by a Philosopher; and I think I duly appreciated my blessings,
and showed it in the swagger with which I marched my man under the
faggery window.

Tempest was depressingly gloomy as we walked along, and my gentle
reminder that we could not take the short cut across the playing fields,
after the doctor's prohibition, but should have to walk round, did not
tend to cheer him up.  I half feared he would propose to walk over, in
defiance of all consequences.  Possibly, if he had been alone, he would
have done so, but on my account he made a grudging concession to law and
order.

At the Redwoods', however, he cheered up at once.  He received a royal
welcome from the little girls--in marked contrast to Miss Mamie's sulky
reception of me as the destroyer of her nice sash.  Redwood himself was
delighted to see him, and the family tea was quite a merry one.

When we adjourned to the captain's "den" afterwards I was decidedly out
of it.  Indeed, it was broadly hinted to me that the little girls
downstairs were anxious for some one to teach them "consequences"; would
I mind?

Considering there was no game I detested more than "consequences," and
no young ladies less open to instruction than the Misses Redwood, I did
not jump at the offer.  It was evident, however, Tempest and Redwood
wanted to talk, and with a vague sense that by leaving them to do so I
was somehow acting for the benefit of Low Heath, I sacrificed myself,
and sat down to assist in the usual composite stories; how, for
instance, the square Dr England met the mealy-faced Sarah (the little
girls knew my nickname as well as the Philosophers) up a tree.  He said
to her, "We must part for ever;" she (that is I) said to him, "My ma
shall know of this;" the consequence was that there was a row, and the
world said, "It's all up."

In present circumstances these occult narratives were full of serious
meaning for me, and my thoughts were far more with the two seniors above
than with the two exacting female juniors below.  However, the time
passed, and presently Tempest's "Come along, youngster," apprised me
that the hour of release had come.

Redwood walked back with us, and from certain fragments of conversation
which fell on my ears I was able to gather something of the result of
the conference.

"If it were only yourself, you know," said Redwood, "I'd say stick out."

"But," said Tempest, "he knows I'm not sorry, even if I say so."

"It's a choice between humble pie and Low Heath losing you," said the
captain.

"Not much loss."

"That's all you know.  There's not a fellow we could spare less."

They walked on in silence; then Redwood said,--

"England ought to see that Jarman rots everything the way he goes on.
We'll be in a better position to get it altered if you cave in this
once."

"I vowed I wouldn't do it.  He'll only chuckle," said Tempest, with a
groan.

"Let him!  Who cares whether Jarman chuckles or not?" retorted the
captain.  "Look here, old chap, don't you think he'd chuckle more if you
got expelled?  That would be the biggest score you could give him.  Take
my advice, and only give him the smallest."

"I don't know.  I'll think about it," said Tempest.

"Of course you will, for the sake of Low Heath.  Next term we'll go
ahead, and the fellows will owe you more than they think."

Here, by an odd chance, just as we came to the school gate, we met Mr
Jarman and Crofter walking out in deep confabulation.

I do not know if they saw us.  If they did, they pretended not to have
done so, and walked on, leaving us to proceed.

"Do you see that?" said Tempest.

"Rather.  I know what it means too.  It's an extra reason why you should
swallow your pride for once, in order to sell them.  I tell you they are
probably counting on your sticking out, and nothing would disappoint
them more."

"Well, old chap," said Tempest, as we came to our door, "it's not your
fault if I don't do it.  I know you're right, but--"

"But it's a jolly bitter pill, and I wish I could swallow it for you.
Good night."

I had the sense for once to keep what I had heard to myself, and retired
to bed more hopeful that all would turn out right than I had been for a
day or two.

The next morning I was wandering about, aloof from my comrades, in the
quadrangle, waiting for the bell to ring for first school, when Marple,
the town bookseller, a tradesman familiar to most Low Heathens, accosted
me.  He was evidently not at home in the school precincts, and, with my
usual modesty, I felt he had come to the right source for information.

"Do you belong to Mr Sharpe's house, young gentleman?" said he, with a
respectful nod which quite captivated me.

"Yes.  Who do you want?"

"I want to see Mr Tempest very particular."

"Oh, he's up in his room.  Wait a bit till the bell rings, and he'll
come out."

So Mr Marple and I stopped and chatted about the holidays, which were
to begin in a day or two, and the football matches and the river.

"You know Mr Tempest pretty well?" said he.

"Rather; I'm his fag, you know."

"A nice gentleman, I fancy.  Pretty well off, eh?"

"Oh no.  He's a swell, but his people are poor, I know."

"Oh, indeed.  Not likely to buy much in my way, eh?"

"Rather not.  He's hard up as it is.  It's not much good your trying to
sell him anything," said I, remembering the rumour about my friend's
indebtedness, and anxious to screen him from further debt.

"Ah, indeed--he's in debt, is he--all round?"

"How do you know that?" said I, bristling up.  "I don't expect he owes
you anything."

Mr Marple laughed.

"That's just what he does; that's why I've stepped over.  I don't like
showing young gents up, but--"

"Look here," cried I aghast, "for mercy's sake, don't show him up,
Marple!  It's as likely as not he's to be expelled as it is; this would
finish him up."

"If he's likely to be expelled, all the more reason I should get my
money before he goes."

"How much is it?"  I gasped.

"A matter of two pounds," said the tradesman.

"Look here," said I, "I'll promise you shall be paid.  Wait till the
last day of the term, do, Marple."

Mr Marple stared at me.  The security I fear was not good enough for
him.  On the other hand, he probably knew that it would not be good for
trade if he were to show up a "Low Heathen."

He took an envelope from his pocket and handed it to me.  It contained
Tempest's bill for sundry stationery, magazines, books, postage stamps,
and so on; headed "Fourth and final application."  The envelope itself
was addressed, "Dr England, with W.  Marple's respectful compliments."

The bell rang just then, and I was so anxious to get Marple off the
scene that I wildly promised anything to be rid of him, and was finally
left, just in time, to meet Tempest unconsciously strolling across the
quadrangle on his way to keep his appointment with the doctor.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

DEEPEST DEPTHS.

We did not see Tempest again till the afternoon.  As we most of us
surmised, he was relieving his feelings after his interview with the
doctor by a spin on the river.

How, I wondered, had the interview gone?  Had he agreed to the
humiliating condition of apologising to Mr Jarman, or had his pride
been too much for him after all?  If so, this was probably his last spin
on the river.

Had our house been Selkirk's, there would, no doubt, have been wagers on
the event.  As it was, the Philosophers contented themselves with
bickering.  The general impression seemed to be that he had refused to
surrender.  That being so, the game was up--there was no object in
keeping up appearances.

A spirit of defiance seemed to get hold of us.  We deliberately sat on
the fence of the prohibited playing fields, in the hope that Mr Jarman
or some one would see us.  Trimble even went to the length of crossing
it at one corner.

What made it more trying was the conduct of the day boys, who, with an
acuteness which did them credit, seemed to have discovered our delicate
situation, and resolved to make the most of it.

They paraded the field about twenty yards from our fence, jeering at us
openly, and daring us to set foot on the turf.

"Look at them," said one, "hung up like a lot of washing on the palings.
We'll make them cut.  Let's have a scientific meeting.  That'll clear
them out."

Whereupon the Urbans ranged themselves on the grass under our noses, and
called upon Mr Flitwick to address them on the "Treatment of Lunatics."

This was too much.  We were few in number, and the palings were hard and
uncomfortable.  But if they thought they were going to frighten us away
by this demonstration, they were mistaken.

Langrish, in a loud voice, called out "Chair," whereupon I, taking the
cue, and assuming that the Philosophers were in congress, called upon
Mr Trimble to favour us with his oration on "Mud."

"Oh, all serene," said Trimble, who till that moment had had as little
notion of his subject as I had had.  "Mud is dirty lumps of stuff lying
about on the grass, like what you see in front of you.  It has neither
brains nor sense.  It's a vile thing to look at, and worse to touch.  If
you--"

"--If you," here broke in Mr Flitwick, "want to see what lunatics
really are, you should look on the palings of some of our school playing
fields.  If you happen to see a row of squinney-eyed, ill-dressed mules,
with large boots and turn-up noses, and afraid of their lives to move
off where they are, those are the prize lunatics.  I have pleasure in
exhibiting a few choice specimens collected from various sources.  The
one thing--"

"--The one thing about mud is, it daren't come within reach of you,"
continued Trimble, getting a little random in his statements, "for fear
of getting one in the eye.  If you want a sample--"

"--There's one," shouted Flitwick, interrupting our orator with a
fragment of mother earth in his face.

Of course it was all up after that.  Doctor or no doctor, we couldn't
sit by and see our treasurer assaulted.  So we hurled ourselves on the
foe, regardless of consequences, and a deadly fight ensued.  Some of the
more cautious of our number were lucky enough to be able to drag their
men off the prohibited field and engage them on the right side of the
fence.

I was not so lucky--indeed, I was doubly unlucky.  For not only was my
adversary my dear friend Dicky Brown, whom I loved as a brother, but he
edged further and further afield as the combat went on, so that at the
last we were cut off from the main body and left to fight our duel
conspicuously in the open.

Dicky was not a scientific pugilist, but he had an awkward way of
closing in with you and getting you round the middle just at the moment
that his left foot got round behind your right calf.  And it grieves me
to say that, although I boasted of far more talent in the exercise of
the fistic art than he did, he had me on my back on the grass just as
Mr Sharpe of all persons walked by.

"What are you two doing?" demanded the master, stopping short.

"Fighting, sir," said the stalwart Dicky, "and I licked him."

"Why are you fighting?"

"Because Flitwick shied mud at Trimble," said I.

The reason did not seem to appeal to Mr Sharpe, who replied,--

"You heard the doctor's orders yesterday, Jones iv., about keeping off
the playing field?"

"Yes, sir," said I, realising for the first time that I was well out in
the middle of the field, and that the rest of my comrades were looking
on from a safe distance.

"Come to me after school for exemplary punishment.  You are the most
disorderly boy in the house, and it is evident a lenient punishment is
no good in your case."

"Please, sir," said the loyal Dicky, "I lugged him on a good part of the
way."

"No, you didn't," snarled I--taking this as a taunt, whereas it was
intended as a "leg-up"--"I came of my own accord."

"Very well," said Mr Sharpe.  "You will come to me, Jones iv., of my
accord"--and he walked away.

I was reckless and defiant, and deaf to Dicky's sympathy.

"I don't care," said I.  "It was a good job for you he came up.  I
should have licked you hollow."

"No, you wouldn't, old chap; I had you over twice," said Dicky.

"Come outside and finish it out."

So we adjourned to the other side of the palings and finished it out in
the presence of the assembled Urbans and Philosophers.  And I grieve to
say once more Dicky had me on my back.

The wrath of my comrades was even more grievous to bear than the
rejoicings of the enemy.  I was promptly withdrawn from the fray as a
bad lot, and had it not been for the opportune bell, should probably
have been kicked all round.

At any rate, I went in disgusted with myself, with Low Heath, with
everybody.  What was the use of keeping it up?  Tempest, ten to one, was
expelled.  Dicky Brown, once my inferior, could put me on my back.  The
Philosophers hated me.  Mr Sharpe had marked me down for exemplary
punishment, and publicly denounced me as the worst boy in the house.
And all this in a single term.  What, I wondered, would it be like, if I
remained, at the end of a second term?

I looked dismally into Tempest's study--he was not back.  Pridgin was
in, but did not want me.  The faggery just now was impossible.  I never
felt more lonely and miserable in my life.

I was wandering down the passage, with my jacket flung over my shoulder
and my shirt sleeves still tucked up, when the voice of Crofter stopped
me.

"Look here," said he, "the contents of your pocket may be interesting to
you, but we don't want them littered about the passage.  Here, catch
hold," and he held out a handful of loose letters.  "Why, what's the
matter?  How blue you look!  Has any one been hurting you?"

"Rather not.  I've been licking a young cad, that's all."

"Well, you don't look as if you enjoyed it, anyhow.  Has Tempest come
back?"

"No--probably he's expelled," said I, determined to have things as
miserable as possible.

"I sincerely hope not," said Crofter, in a tone which quite softened me
to him.  "He doesn't like me, but I'd be sorry if he left, all the
same."

"He thinks you and Jarman would like to see him kicked out.  That's the
one reason why he might stay on."

Crofter laughed sweetly.

"What a notion!  Why, I've had a good mind to go to England myself and
stick up for him."

"It's a good job you haven't," said I.

"What I'm afraid is, that he is worried about other things.  I hope, by
the way, you never said anything about what I told you the other day."

"No," said I, not quite candidly.  For I had tried to tell Tempest, but
he would not let me.

"That's right.  I hope he's cleared his debts off by now."

"I--I don't think he has," stammered I.

"Really!  It's a pity.  The doctor would be much more likely to be down
on him for being in debt than--"

He pulled up suddenly, as Tempest at that moment walked up.  He must
have heard the last few words; and if it required looks of guilt and
confusion on my part to convince him we had been speaking of him, I
think I gave him proof positive.

He had apparently intended to summon me to his study.  But, as he saw
with whom I was conferring, and overheard the subject of our
conversation, he thought better of it, and with lowering face stalked
away.

I wished I was dead then!  Something told me I had lost my friend, and
that no amount of explanation could do away with the barrier which had
suddenly been erected between us.

"Awkward," said Crofter.  "It's a good job we were talking no harm of
him."

"He won't fancy our talking about him at all," said I.

"I suppose we've as much right to talk about him as any one else."

"He'll be awfully down on me, I know," said I miserably.

"All I can say is, if he is, you're a young fool if you care two straws.
Tempest's a good fellow; but he's rather a way of not allowing a fellow
to have a soul of his own."

This failed to console me.  I made one effort to see Tempest and
explain, but he was occupied with his books, and did not even deign to
notice my presence in his study.

Later on in the evening all speculation as to the result of the
morning's interview was set at rest.  An unusual summons came to
Sharpe's to meet the doctor in our hall.

We assembled uncomfortably and with sore spirits.  The worry of the
whole business was telling on us, and we heartily hoped, while we
clamoured for no surrender in words, that Tempest would disappoint us
for once.

The doctor came presently, looking very grave, and accompanied by Mr
Jarman.  From the head master's face we concluded at once that all was
up.  But to our surprise he said,--

"I am glad to say, in reference to the matter I met you boys about
yesterday, that Tempest has taken a proper sense of his duty, and has
undertaken to apologise for his conduct to Mr Jarman.  That being so,
Tempest, you will please take this opportunity of expressing your
regret."

Tempest flushed as he rose in obedience to the doctor's summons.  It was
evidently, as Redwood had said, "a bitter pill," and had he been a less
brave fellow, he could hardly have swallowed it.  As it was, even the
knowledge that the welfare of the entire house was somehow dependent on
his submission was scarcely able to break down his pride.

He advanced to Mr Jarman more like one who comes to administer a
thrashing than ask for pardon, and after eyeing him almost fiercely for
a moment, summoned his self-control sufficiently to say hoarsely,--

"I apologise, sir."

Mr Jarman bit his lips.  It was not the triumph he had expected.
Indeed the whole manner of it was such as to hurt instead of soothe his
feelings.

"This is hardly an apology," said he to the doctor.

"I trust, Tempest, it means that you regret your action?"

It was an awkward question.  Tempest had gone further than any one
expected, and his silence now reminded the doctor what the cost had
been.

"I think," said he, not waiting for a reply to his own question,
"Tempest has fulfilled his pledged--not cordially, I am sorry to say,
but sufficiently."

"Very well, sir," said Mr Jarman, "I accept his apology for what it is
worth, which seems very little."

"Now, I regret to say," continued the head master, producing a letter
which made my heart jump to my mouth, "I have a more serious matter to
speak about.  I wish heartily what we have just heard had been the end
of this painful interview.  But it is necessary to refer to something
different--a very serious offence against rules.  It concerns you,
Tempest.  Is it a fact that you are in debt to some of the tradesmen?"

Tempest changed colour again and replied,--

"Yes, sir, I am sorry to say I am."

I held on tight to my desk.  This was a finishing touch surely, and I,
if any one, felt myself the criminal.

"This letter, addressed to me, but containing a bill for more than two
pounds owing by you, part of it since last term, has been left at my
house--I presume by the tradesman to whom it is due.  Come here and look
at it, Tempest."

Tempest obeyed.

"Is it a fact that you are in debt to this extent?"

"Yes, sir--more."

"You are aware--"

Here I could stand it no longer, but sprang to my feet and shouted,--

"Please, sir, it's my fault!"

Everybody turned to me in amazement, as well they might.

"Your fault, Jones iv.?--come forward and explain."

"I mean," said or rather shouted I, speaking while I walked up the room,
"it's my fault you got that bill, sir.  I don't know how you got it, but
it wasn't meant to get to you, really.  I must have dropped it.  I--I--
was going--to try--to get it paid for him, sir.  Really--"

Tempest gave me a glare that knocked all the spirit out of me.  What
business had I, it seemed to demand, to meddle in his private affairs?

I felt I had done him a real bad turn by my clumsiness, but had not the
wit to avoid making bad worse.

"Yes, sir, I told Marple--"

"I purposely refrained from mentioning names, Jones iv.; why can you not
do so too?"

"I told him to keep it dark, and got him to give it to me.  I--I knew
Tempest hadn't enough money to pay it--and--and--"

An exclamation of anger from Tempest cut me short, and I was sent
ignominiously back to my place.

"Tempest," said the head master very sternly, "send me in a list of all
you owe before you go to bed to-night, and understand that, unless all
is paid by Friday when we break up, you will not be allowed to return to
Low Heath after the holidays.  You must cease in any case to retain the
headship of the house, even for the few days of the term that remain.
You, I understand.  Crofter, come next in form order; you will act as
head boy in the meantime."

In the midst of my anguish I could see the look of meek resignation on
Crofter's face, and that of quiet satisfaction on Mr Jarman's.  At
Tempest I dared not look, or at my fellow-Philosophers.

What had I done?  What was to become of me?  How could I get out of it?
These were the three questions which set my poor brain spinning as I
wandered off alone to the remotest corner of the quadrangle, and as,
later on, I lay miserably awake in my bed.

I had done my friend about as much harm as I possibly could.  I may not
have meant it.  But who cares what a fellow means, so long as he acts
like a cad?  As to what was to become of me, I had had a taste of that
already.  The faggery door had been locked against me, and a missive
shoved under the bottom had apprised me of my fate in that quarter.

"To Beast Sarah.

"Take notice that you are kicked out of the Philosophers, and if you
dare show your abominable face within a mile of them you'll get it all
over with rulers.  It has been resolved by Mr Langrish and seconded by
Mr Trimble, and passed by all the lot, that you be and are hereby
kicked whenever any one sees you.  Any one not kicking you will be
lammed.  It is also resolved that the faggery be fumigated and
disinfected during the holidays, and that any chap seen talking to you
be refused to be let in till he has been vaccinated.  You are about the
lowest, meanest, vilest, abominablest, unmitigatedest sneak going.
Three cheers for poor old Tempest, and down with girls' schools and
washerwomen!"

This fiery document was formally signed by every Philosopher in the
house, together with a particular word of opprobrium addressed to me by
each of my former colleagues.

I was not long in realising that I was an outcast in Sharpe's.  No one
would look at me, still less speak to me.  Pridgin ordered me off like a
dog.  Wales slammed his door in my face.  When I appeared in the
preparation hall, a long hiss saluted me, even though Mr Sharpe was
present.  Even outside fellows seemed to have heard of my crime, and
looked askance or gave me a wide berth.  I can truly say that I found
myself the most miserable boy in Low Heath, and only longed for the end
of the term to come, that I might shake the dust of the hateful place
from my feet, and drop out of the sight of a school full of enemies.

Indeed, as I lay awake that night I had serious thoughts of making off
there and then.  If I had only had my boots, I think I might have done
so; but they were in the blacking-room; and my desperation drew the line
at walking off in my bare feet.

I was sitting up in bed, half whimpering with headache and misery, when
a light appeared at the end of the dormitory.  It was Crofter, in his
new capacity of head of the house, taking his rounds before turning in.
The sight of him brought home to me the injury I had done, not only to
Tempest, but the whole house.  For it was my fault, and mine only, that
Crofter was at this moment captain of Sharpe's.

To my surprise and alarm, when he came up to my bed he stopped short,
and drawing a letter from his pocket, put it into my hand, saying--

"Put that under your pillow till the morning."

It was more than nature could do to sleep with a mystery like this on
the top of my misery.  I listened to the clock as it struck the hours
through the night, and thought the day would never come.  Indeed, the
getting-up bell had sounded before the winter sun struggled in through
the dormitory window.

Then by the light of a candle I seized the missive from under my pillow
and tore it open.

A five-pound note fell out, and with it the following letter.

"You have made a nice mess of it, and ought to be happy.  The least you
can do is to try to make things right for Tempest.  Call round on the
following six tradesmen (giving the six names, one of which was Marple)
early to-morrow, and pay Tempest's bill at each, and bring home the
receipts.  You needn't mention who sent you.  Send the receipts to me,
and if Tempest asks any questions, tell him you paid the money by
request of a friend.

"W.  Crofter."



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

I AM ADVISED TO LIE LOW.

My first impulse on reading Crofter's letter was to jump for joy.  It
meant that Tempest would stay at Low Heath, and that I was to be allowed
to assist in keeping him there.

But my second thoughts were more of a surprise than pleasure.  Crofter
was a mystery to me.  His fellow-seniors disliked him, and warned me
against him.  But, as far as I could see, he was not as bad as they made
him out, and certainly never said anything as bad about them as they
said about him.

What could be his object now if it was not a disinterested one?  He
would be permanent captain of the house if Tempest left, and yet he was
doing the very thing that would keep Tempest at school.  Tempest had
openly insulted him during the term, and yet here he was helping his
enemy out of a very tight place.  I knew he was well off, so probably he
could afford the £5; but at the end of the term pocket-money was not a
plentiful commodity.  He said nothing about being paid back, too; surely
he did not mean to make Tempest a free gift of this magnificent amount!
The more I thought it over the more I felt Crofter was a brick, and had
been scandalously misunderstood.  He seemed to me a true type of the
virtuous man, who, when struck on one cheek, turns the other, and when
robbed of his coat offers his cloak too.  I only hoped Tempest might
know what he owed him.  In short, in the brief time it took me to dress,
I had worked myself up into a state of enthusiasm on the subject of
Crofter.

As to the mystery of Mr Marple's letter having got into the doctor's
hands, no doubt I had been careless and dropped the compromising
envelope, which some foolish but honest person (it did not occur to me
at the time it might have been Crofter himself) had picked up and
dropped in the head master's letter-box, supposing he was doing a very
clever thing.  Tempest would not be likely to allow me to explain, which
was hard on me, and made it all the more virtuous on my part to assist
now in putting things right for him.  Luckily for him, he had friends at
Low Heath in spite of himself.

When I encountered Crofter in the morning, I requested him, with a
knowing look of intelligence, to give me an _exeat_ into the town to do
some shopping.  It was probably the first recognition he had received of
his temporary authority as head of the house, and he made no difficulty
in granting my request.

I made my way first of all to Marple's.

"Oh, about that bill you gave me.  How much was it?"

"Two pounds and sixpence, young gentleman."

"I said I'd see it paid for you, didn't I?"

"You did.  I don't want to show up--"

"All right, you needn't.  Here's the money; give me the change, please,
and a receipt."

Mr Marple opened his eyes very wide at the sight of a five-pound note
within three days of the end of term.  "I--I hope it's all right," said
he, hesitatingly.  "You needn't have it if you don't want," said I,
mounting my high horse.

"I'm sure I'm much obliged to you, young gentleman," said the tradesman,
giving the note a professional twitch, and proceeding to count out the
change from his till.  "I shall always be pleased to attend to any
little orders from Mr Tempest or you."

"You can make out the receipt to Tempest," said I; "I expect he won't
get much more here."

"Don't say that.  I'm sure no offence was meant."

It was a delicious sensation to feel myself master of the situation like
this.  I could have bullied Marple if I had liked, but I resolved not to
be too hard on him.

"I'm sure I'm much obliged," said he, "for all your trouble.  Have you
seen these pretty little pencil-sharpers?  They are quite new.  I shall
be pleased if you will accept one, young gentleman."

A pencil-sharpener was the very thing I wanted.  All the term I had been
wrestling with a blunt penknife, which no sooner uncovered the lead at
the end of a pencil than it broke it off.  So in a weak moment I
accepted the gift, and forfeited my advantage.

From Marple's I proceeded to the confectioner's, where a score of nearly
a pound stood against Tempest.  Here, again, I experienced the sweets of
being treated with distinguished consideration, and being asked to
partake of a strawberry ice (how Rammage, by the way, continued to have
strawberry ices in the middle of December I have never yet clearly
understood) while the receipt was being made out.

Mr Winget, the hatter, rather disappointed me by offering me nothing
more than his sincere thanks for the settlement of his little bill.  He
might at least, I thought, have offered me a mourning hatband or a new
school ribbon.  His bill, however, was only five shillings, so probably
the profit did not permit of any gratuitous allowance in recognition of
my distinguished services.

I was consoled, however, by Mr Ringstead, the games man, who presented
me with a net-bag for holding tennis balls, and urged me, whenever I
wanted any little thing in the way of repairs to bats, or fresh spikes
to my running shoes, to let him know.

It was all very pleasant, and I grieve to say that the shady side of all
this petty bribery and corruption never once occurred to my simple mind.

I returned to school covered with self-satisfaction, and virtuously
clutching in my hand half-a-crown, the final change out of the "fiver."
This in due course I put in an envelope, together with the batch of
receipts, and laid on Crofter's table after morning school, with the
laconic message under the flap, "All right, T.J. iv."

I was far too knowing to let out my secret to the Philosophers, whose
agitation and indignation at Tempest's probable expulsion knew no bounds
and somewhat amused me.

"Look here, Sarah," said Langrish, as I entered for the first time after
my disgrace of the previous day--I knew my comrades well enough to be
sure they would like to see me--"we all know you're about the
beastliest, howlingest cad in Low Heath; so that's all right."

"I'm glad you think so."

"Yes, and you've been told to clear out, as it's your fault Tempest's
expelled."

"Is it?  That's all you know," said I.

"Yes, and you're kicked out of the Philosophers, and we're going to
invite Dicky Brown to join us.  _He's_ a decent chap."

This was rather a blow.

"I thought no town-boys were eligible."

"No cads are; that's why you're out of it."

"Look here--" said I.

"We're not going to look here.  You can cut and go, and sit on the
stairs.  We don't want you in here, do we, you chaps?"

"Rather not, unless we've got our kicking boots on."

"All right," said I, feeling I must play one or two of my trumps.  "I
sha'n't tell you what I was going to."

"Pooh, we know all about it," said Coxhead.  But it was plain by the way
they had all pricked their ears they did not.

"Oh, if you know, it's all right.  But you don't know the latest."

"We don't want to, unless it's that old Tempest has got off."

"That's just what it is," said I triumphantly.

"Good old Sarah! how do you know?"

"Never mind, it's a secret; but it's a fact, honour bright."

"What, has he paid all his bills?"

"They're all paid, I know that."

"I suppose," said Langrish, "as that motion about Sarah being kicked out
wasn't properly seconded, it's off, isn't it?"

"Does any gentleman second the motion?" said Coxhead, glancing round
the assembled Philosophers.

No one seconded it.

"Jolly lucky shave for you, young Sarah," said Coxhead.

"Thanks awfully," said I.

"We may as well divide up the pool now?" suggested Warminster.

With a generosity which was really touching, the Philosophers had
clubbed together the shattered fragments of their term's pocket-money to
assist Tempest in his financial troubles.  They had done it
ungrudgingly, nay enthusiastically, and it was not against them that the
enthusiasm remained now as each one unexpectedly received back his
Philosopher's mite from the depths of the kindly "pool."

It is all very well keeping a secret like mine for twenty-four hours.
It was an effort, but I did it, and prevailed on my comrades to keep it
too.  It was even harder work to prevail upon them as a matter of policy
to accept the temporary supremacy of Crofter in the house.  Nothing
would induce them to refrain from cheering Tempest (much to his
displeasure) on every possible occasion.  It made it awkward for me
sometimes when this happened in Crofter's presence; for as things now
were in Sharpe's, a cheer for the old captain meant a hoot at the new;
and I felt that Crofter, did the fellows only know all, did not deserve
their resentment.

After forty-eight hours I could not restrain myself any longer.  It was
not fair to myself, or Crofter, or Low Heath, that every one should
suppose Tempest was to be expelled when he really was not.  So, with
some misgivings, I decided to put myself in his way and break the
agreeable news to him, and so have everything cleared up before the end
of term.

It was not difficult to find an excuse.  I had not been to Tempest's
rooms since our unlucky quarrel, and had been suffering inconvenience
ever since by the fact that my Latin Gradus was there.  On the last day
but one of the term, therefore, I developed a burning desire to consult
my missing handbook, and must needs go in search of it.

Tempest was sitting, miserably enough, before the fire, with his feet on
the fender and his hands up to the back of his head as I entered.  It
was not till I was well in the room and had closed the door that he
turned round and saw me.

I thought at first he meant to fly at me, his face clouded so angrily.
But it changed to a look of contempt as he said,--

"Well?"

"Tempest, I'm awfully sorry, really I am, but--"

"Don't let us have any of that.  If I thought you'd meant it, I should
precious soon know what to do.  You've done me about the worst turn a
fellow could, and if you weren't a conceited young ass it would be some
use thrashing you.  As it is, somebody else may do that when I'm gone."

The wretchedness of his tone quite touched me.  I forgot my anger and
sense of resentment, and all the old affection and loyalty came back
with a rush.  How could I ever have imagined a fellow like Crofter was
worthy to hold a candle to my old Dux?

"Really, Tempest," began I, losing my head and blundering I scarcely
knew whither, "when you saw me talking to Crofter--" He uttered an angry
exclamation.

"There, now, shut up about your friend Crofter.  I don't want to hear
about him."

"He's not my friend, Tempest; he's--he's yours."

He wheeled round in his chair and laughed bitterly.

"It's a queer time to joke," said he, with a laugh that cut me through.

"It's no joke, Tempest.  You don't know what he's done for you."

"Don't I?  I fancy I do."

"About the bills," said I, faltering, "you know."

"Ah! don't come here to tell me about that."

"It was all of his own accord he paid them."

"He what?" shouted Tempest, springing from his chair and facing round.

"Paid them, you know; at least, I paid them for him."

"You?  Paid?" and he caught me by the collar and shook me like a puppy.

"You said you knew," gasped I.

"Paid my bills!  You say that blackguard had the cheek to--"

"He got me to do it; it was his money, though."

He groaned as if some one had wounded him.  A crimson flush of shame and
mortification overspread his face, and for a moment he stared at me
speechless.

Then he pulled himself together and strode out of the room.  Utterly
bewildered and half terrified, I followed him.  What had I done to
offend him?  Had all the trouble of the term turned his head?

To my alarm he made straight for Crofter's study.  No one was there.  He
turned and saw me.

"Tell Crofter I want him at once."

I departed with my heart in my mouth.  At the foot of the staircase I
met Crofter.

"Tempest wants to see you," said I; "he sent me to--to ask you to come."

"He doesn't know?" inquired Crofter.

"Yes--I told him--I--I thought I ought to let him know."  Crofter
laughed his sweet laugh.

"If I had wanted it known all over Low Heath," said he, "I could hardly
have done better than tell you to keep it a secret.  I'd much sooner he
had not known.  However--where is he?"

"In your study, I think."

I felt constrained to follow.  Crofter evidently was expecting to be the
recipient of an outburst of effusive gratitude.  I had not the courage
to disabuse him.

He walked pleasantly and graciously into his study, where Tempest stood,
flushing and biting his lips, awaiting him.  "Is this true what that
youngster says, that you've had the--that you've paid bills of mine?"

"I'm sorry he told you, Tempest.  I thought it might get you out of a
difficulty, and I--"

"And you expect me to thank you!  Take that, for daring to meddle in my
affairs!"

And he struck Crofter on the cheek--not a hard blow, but one which sent
the recipient reeling across the room with astonishment.

For a moment I expected a fight.  Crofter, however, pale, but smiling
still, declined the challenge.

"You'll be sorry, I'm sure," said he, as coolly as he could.  "I only
wanted to do you a good turn, and--"

"I'm sorry already," said Tempest, who had already gathered himself
together.  "I hoped you'd fight like a man.  As you're afraid to, I'm
sorry I touched you."

"I see nothing to fight about," said Crofter.  "I don't see what there
is to be angry about."

Tempest waited motionless for a few uncomfortable moments, in the hope
that Crofter would pluck up spirit to accept the challenge.  But, as
Crofter only smiled, he turned on his heel and strode out of the room.
As he passed me, he beckoned me imperiously to follow him.  I did so in
terror.

He put a piece of paper and a pen before me.

"Write down there an account of every bill you paid, and the amount."

I obeyed--my memory fortunately served me for the task.

"Now go.  You've had the satisfaction of seeing me make an ass of myself
in striking that cad--he's not worth it.  You may go and tell him I'm
sorry if you like.  As for you, I don't want to see any more of you.  Go
to your captain, and leave me alone."

And he flung himself miserably into his chair, leaning forward with his
head on his hands, and apparently indifferent whether I stayed or went.

I went, leaving him thus.  And the memory of him sitting there haunted
me all that night and for weeks to come.

When, next day, the news went round that Tempest had escaped expulsion,
the general delight was tempered with amazement at the rumour which
accompanied it, that he owed his escape to Crofter.  No one but Crofter
himself could have put the latter story into circulation, and to any one
knowing the two seniors as well as I did, it was obvious that what had
completed the humiliation of one had been the crowning triumph of the
other.

Crofter could not have avenged himself for the insults of the term more
effectively; and Tempest's proud nature could not have suffered a
bitterer wound than to know that he had been put under an obligation in
spite of himself, and without the possibility of preventing it, by his
worst enemy.

The ordinary "Sharper" could hardly be expected to trouble himself about
questions of motive.  It was sufficient for him that his hero was saved,
and that the credit of the popular act which saved him belonged to
Crofter.

Consequently both were cheered equally when they appeared in public, and
of the two Crofter accepted his popularity with a far better grace than
his mortified adversary.

But it was all very miserable to me as I slunk home that afternoon in
the train.  All the hopes of the wonderful term had been disappointed.
I was a recognised dunce and idler at Low Heath.  I had lost my best
friend and sold myself to his enemy.  My self-respect was at a low ebb.
I knew that in a post or two would come a report which would bring tears
to my mother's eyes, and cause my guardian to grunt and say, "I expected
as much."  The worst of it was, I could not get it out of my head yet
that I was rather a fine young fellow if only people knew it, and that
my misfortunes were more to blame for the failure of the term than my
faults.

To my relief a letter came early in the holidays from Dicky Brown's
people, asking me to spend the last two weeks with them, I jumped at it,
for in my present miserable frame of mind even home was dismal.

But when I found myself back at Low Heath, installed in Dicky's quiet
little family circle, I was almost sorry I had come.  For Dicky was all
high spirits and jubilation.  He had won a form prize; everything had
gone swimmingly for him.  The Urbans looked up to him; the head master
had patted him on the back; the Redwoods had taken a fancy to him.  No
one thought of calling him by a feminine nickname.

"I think Low Heath's a ripping place," said he, as we strolled past the
gate of the empty quadrangle in one of our holiday rambles.  "I'm jolly
glad we got kicked out of Dangerfield, ain't you?"

"Middling," said I; "the fact is, Dicky, you may as well know it, but
I'm rather sick of this place."

"Hullo!" said he, looking at me, "why, I thought you were having such a
high old time."

"I--I've come a bit of a howler, Dicky;" here I gulped ominously, much
to Dicky's concern.  "I've fooled things rather, you know."  I was in
for my confession now, and gave the penitent horse his head.  "I'm jolly
miserable, Dicky, that's all about it, and wish I was dead, don't you
know, and that sort of thing."

"What's up, old chappie?" said Dicky, taking my arm, and evidently in a
fright lest I should compromise myself by breaking down on the spot.
"Come down by the willows; it's rather muddy, but it's quieter."

So we ploughed through the mud under the willows, and I let out on Dicky
all that was in my heart.  I'm sure he thought it a lot of bosh, but he
was too kind to say so, and hung on to my arm, and never once
contradicted me when I called myself a fool.

"You have rotted it a bit," remarked he, when the story was complete.
"Never mind, old chap, it can't be helped.  You'll worry through all
right."

This was true comfort.  If Dicky had been a prig like me, he would have
tried to talk to me like a father, and driven me crazy.  It made all the
difference that he understood me, and yet believed in me a little.

"It strikes me," said he, with refreshing candour, "you fancy yourself a
bit too much, Tommy.  I'd advise you to lie low a bit, and it will all
come round."

"That's just exactly what Tempest said to me the first day of term,"
said I, with a groan.

"There you are," said he; "bless you, you're not going to get done over
one wretched term, are you?  I wouldn't if I were you."

"But all the chaps are down on me."

"What do you care?" said he, with a snort.  "Who cares twopence about
the lot of them--chaps like them too?  You're a cut better than that
lot, I fancy--ought to be, anyhow."

What balm it all was to my wounds!  What miles of mud we ploughed
through that afternoon! and how, as the water gradually leaked into my
boots, my heart rose out of them, and got back somehow to its proper
place, and enabled me to look at things in their proper light.  I think
Dicky, little as he knew it, was sent by God to help me pull myself
together, and I shall always think better of him for his blunt, genuine
encouragement that day.

On our way back he pulled up at Redwood's door.

"Let's see if he's in," said he; "he won't mind."

"All right," said I, beginning to quail again a little, and yet
determined to go through with the whole business.

Redwood was in, mending a pair of skates, in anticipation of a day or
two's frost before the holidays were over.

"Look here, Redwood," said Dicky, determined to make things easy for me.
"Old Jones minimus is in the blues.  He's been fooling it rather this
term, you know, but he's a bit sick of it, and we thought you'd like to
know, didn't we, young Jones minimus?"

"Yes, if you don't mind, Redwood," said I.

"Wait a bit--tea's just ready.  We'll have ours up here," said the
captain.

Over tea Dicky trotted out my troubles second-hand to our host,
appealing to me every now and then to confirm his statement that I'd
rather "mucked" it over this and that, and so on.

Redwood nibbled away at his tea, looking up now and then with a friendly
nod to show he agreed with all that was said about me.

When all was said, he remarked--

"I wouldn't worry, youngster, if I were you.  It's been a poor show last
term, but you'll pull yourself together right enough.  Take my advice,
and lie low a bit, that's the best thing for your complaint."

"Why," said I, "that's just exactly what Tempest said to me."

"There you are again," broke in Dicky, cutting himself a hunch of cake.

Presently Redwood began to "draw" me on the subject of Tempest, and
looked rather blank when I told him of the dismal circumstances in which
the term had closed at Sharpe's.  However, he did not favour Dicky and
me with much comment on the matter, and finally got us to help him
sharpen his skates and talk about other things.

I went to bed that night at Dicky's more easy and hopeful than I had
been for weeks, and felt half-impatient for term to begin again, so that
I might put into practice the new and trebly-patent specific of lying
low.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

PUTTING ON THE BRAKE.

The holidays went by rapidly enough.  I tore myself away from Dicky's
consoling companionship three days from the end, and rushed home to see
my mother.  I wonder what she thought of the difference a couple of
weeks had made in me?  When I started to Dicky's I had been limp,
dejected, and down on my luck.  Now she found me chirpy, and with a
stiff upper lip.  She did not make remarks, but I could see how relieved
she was.

My mother was not the person to take a mean advantage of me, or get me
into a corner to lecture me.  Rather not!  She took me for what I was,
and let me see how she loved me.  That was the proper sort of help for
me.  In some ways she made less of me than usual, but I could see why
she did that; she saw I wanted letting alone, and she did it, bless her!
Only on the last evening, a Sunday, as we walked back from church, she
said--

"Are you glad or sorry to be going back to-morrow, Tom?"

"Sorry for some things--glad for others.  I fooled a bit last term, you
know, mother."

"Ah, well, sonny, it's part of the lessons of school to find out our
mistakes now and then.  It was all new to you at first.  I expect you
tried to do too much, you know."

"I know--you mean I'd best lie low a bit, mother."

"Yes.  I know what you mean," said she.

"There you are!" exclaimed I, staggered by this new coincidence, "that's
what every chap has said.  I'll do my best, really, mother; only it's
jolly hard.  Don't be awfully sorry if I don't get right all at once;
I'll try, you know."

"You can't do more than your best, sonny dear."

"Redwood says," continued I, "that I shall probably tool about more or
less to the end of my time.  It's in my line, he says; but he rather
backs me to pull myself together for all that."

"So do I, Tom.  And the best friend you have does so too."

My journey next day was very different from the strange journey of a
term ago.  I had neither tan boots nor square-topped hat nor lavender
gloves; and I could afford to smile with Langrish (who joined me _en
route_) at some of the poor little greenhorns on their way to make their
entry into Low Heath.

How different it was, too, to be hailed by half a dozen voices from the
top of the omnibus at the station and told to hop up beside them!  And
how jolly to ride in triumph up Bridge Street, exchanging shouts with
familiar passengers on the way, or uttering defiant war-whoops at the
day boys!

And how jolly to tumble in at Sharpe's door once more, and slap one
another on the back, and crowd up into the old familiar faggery, and
hear all the old chaff and slang, interspersed with stories of the
holidays, and second-hand Christmas jokes!

And how jolly to hear the organ again in the chapel, and the prayers,
with friends all round you; and finally, when the day was over, tuck up
again in the little cubicle, and hear your chum's voice across the
partition droning more and more sleepily, till finally you and it
dropped off together!

One of the last to arrive during the day was Tempest, who had run from
the station, and came in flushed with exercise, but grave and tight
about the lips.  The ovation he received from the Philosophers scarcely
drew a smile from him, and when he reached his own study he slammed the
door ominously and cheerlessly behind him.  We none of us liked it.

"What's it to be?" said Coxhead.  "Is he to be cock of the house this
term, or has he chucked it up?"

That was the question which was agitating us all.  Till the form orders
were posted to-morrow no one could tell.  Crofter, we knew, had been
doing all he knew to get ahead, and considering the slack way in which
Tempest had let things go all last term, it seemed very much as if he
might succeed.

If he did, our duty would be a difficult one.  Crofter had a claim on us
for having saved Tempest from being expelled, and we could hardly refuse
to own him should he come out cock of the house.  On the other hand.
Tempest was the man of our heart, and our tender imagination failed to
picture him in any secondary position in Sharpe's,--secondary to
Crofter, above all other things.

The day closed with one curious incident.

Langrish came to me after supper in a state of wrathful perturbation.

"Look here, young Sarah," said he, "are you Tempest's fag or not?
That's all about it."

"I don't know," said I; "I was, but he told me--"

"He told you he didn't want a cad like you hanging about his place.  All
very well--that doesn't follow I'm his fag as well as Crofter's.  Here,
catch hold; you've got to take this to Crofter.  _I'm_ not going to take
it--it means a licking most likely, and I don't see why I'm to be let in
for it."

He handed me an envelope, evidently containing coin, addressed
"Crofter," in Tempest's well-known writing.

I did not relish the commission, for I had my guess as to the contents
of the missive.  Curiosity, however, prompted me to take it and proceed
to Crofter's study.

"Well, youngster," said Crofter, "turned up again?  Have you seen
Tempest yet?"

"Yes--he sent this," said I.

Crofter took the envelope and opened it.  Five sovereigns and a half-
sovereign dropped out on the table.  No letter accompanied the money,
but its meaning was clear enough.  Crofter's brow contracted, and his
habitual smile deserted him for once.

"What is this?  Some mistake," said he.

"It's what he owes you," suggested I.

"I suppose so; but that was only £4 17 shillings 6 pence."

"Perhaps the rest is something for yourself," I remarked, making myself
scarce in time to escape the task of returning the change.

Bother it!  Crofter must square this part of the business up with his
enemy.  _I_ didn't want to be dragged any more into it.

There was a rush for the house board early next morning to learn our
fate as to the captaincy of Sharpe's.

"Whew!" said Langrish, as we reached it; "bracketed."

So it was.  Tempest's and Crofter's names were braced together at the
head of the list.

"That's a nice go!  I suppose they'll have to go halves.  All the worse
for us."

"I should think, as Tempest was captain last term, he'll go on again
this," I said.

"He wasn't captain when term ended; Crofter was."

"I vote they fight it out," said Warminster.  "Two to one on the
winner."

"It would save trouble if they made Pridgin head; he's third man up."

"Pridgin!"  The easy-going owner of the name was spared something by not
being present to hear the amused contempt with which the suggestion was
greeted.

An hour later the doctor came down to settle matters for us.

"Under the circumstances," said he, "it seems right that Crofter should
take charge of the house.  I understand that Tempest's debts, on account
of which he was removed from the headship last term, are now all
honourably settled.  But as he was more than once reported for breaking
rules last term, it is only fair that Crofter, whose marks are equal,
and against whom no complaint was recorded, should captain the house."

That was all.  Tempest, on the whole, looked relieved.  Crofter smiled a
satisfied smile.  Pridgin and Wales looked blue; and the Philosophers
took time to consider what they thought.

As for me, although Tempest had thrown me over, I could guess what a
blow this was for him; not personally, for he would probably be glad to
be rid of the responsibility, but as a public disgrace it was sure to
wound him keenly.

I longed to be able to go and tell him how sorry I was; but after what
had happened last term I dare not.  In that respect, whether I liked it
or not, I must "lie low."

The Philosophers were not long in formally exchanging opinions on the
situation.

A meeting was summoned for the same evening to inaugurate things
generally.  I was a little doubtful what I ought to do.  Last term
philosophy had not tended to diligent work, and with my good resolutions
in view I felt that I should be better out of it.  The little tiff with
my comrades before the holidays had almost solved the difficulty; but
since then I had been formally re-admitted to the fold, and it would be
almost treasonable to "scratch" now.

"I _move_ and third, and old Trim seconds and fourths," announced
Langrish, "that old Sal be, and is, president as before."

"And I carry that motion," said Warminster, who prided himself on his
acquaintance with the procedure of public meetings.

"I move an amendment," said I.

"Shut up, or you'll be kicked out again," said the secretary.

"Shut up yourself, or you'll be kicked in," retorted I, feeling I must
carry everything with a high hand if I was to carry them at all.  "No.
Look here, you chaps, I'm not so green as I look."

"Then you must look fearfully green," muttered Coxhead.

I took no heed of the interruption, which was not relevant, and
proceeded,--

"It was all very well last term, but it won't wash this.  What I say is,
that if the cock of the school is the head boy in the school, and the
cock of the house is the head boy in the house, the president of the
Philosophers has got to be the chap highest up in the Philosophers, and
that's not me.  Now old Warminster is.  _He's_ a jolly clever chap, and
got the form prize on his head, and he's a rattling good speaker, and a
middling sprinter, and writes a fairly good hand!  _He's_ the sort of
chap we want.  We want some one who can keep the secretary, and
treasurer, and auditor, and registrar, and all that lot, in their place,
and doesn't mind telling them they're idiots when they are.  I never
could do it.  It's rough on the club not to have a chap like
Warminster," continued I, waxing warm, and undaunted by the murmurs of
my audience.  "He can make you all sit up.  He's not the sort of chap to
let the Philosophers go rotting about, talking what they know nothing
about and all that.  He'll see that the louts are kept out of it, and
only fellows who've got a record of something are let in.  Bless you, I
used to let in any sort of bounder that asked!  Look round you and see.
That's the sort of lot I let in.  It won't wash, though.  Fancy having a
lot of outsiders who can't translate a Latin motto, and make 'corpore' a
feminine genitive!  Now old Warminster's a nailer at Latin, and can put
one or two of us to bed at Euclid.  He'll keep us out of blunders of
that sort, that make all the school grin at us.  I therefore propose,
fifth, fourth, third, and second, that Tip.  Warminster is the president
of the Philosophers, and that the secretary, treasurer, auditor,
registrar, and all that lot, get a month's notice to jack it up unless
they're on the front desk.  There you are!  Of course they won't like
it--can't help that.  No back-deskers for us.  Front desk or nothing!"

This oration, the longest I ever delivered so far, and in all
probability the longest I ever shall deliver, was listened to with a
curious mixture of discomfort and attention.  At first it was nearly
howled down, but it took as it went on.  Warminster, for whom I really
did not feel quite so much admiration as my words seemed to imply, but
who yet was the hard-working man of our lot--Warminster was wonderfully
pleased with it.  The others, one by one, dropped their noisy protests,
and looked out of the window.  Trimble attempted a little bravado, by
sticking his tongue in his cheek; but my peroration was listened to with
marked attention.

"Cuts down the club a bit," said Coxhead, who occupied a desk in class
on the third row, "if it's only to be top-deskers."

"Cuts old Sal out, to begin with," said Langrish, who was just on the
bench of honour.

"It'll cut you out next week, old hoss," said I.

"Me!  What are you talking about?"

"You wait till the week's order is up: you'll see."

Langrish glared indignantly.

"If you think an idiot like you is going to--"

"Look here," said Warminster, "I vote we go easy at first, and make it
any one who's not gone down in order in a month."

"I say, nobody who's not gone up one in the term," suggested Langrish,
glancing defiantly at me.

"All serene," said I, "that'll suit my book.  It'll be roughish on you,
though."

"Will it?  See how you'll feel when you're chucked out neck and crop, my
beauty!"

My main object had been to get out of being president.  But, somehow, in
doing it I had struck a note which made the Philosophers sit up.  It was
no credit to me it happened so, but it was one of those lucky flukes
which sometimes turn out well and do a good stroke without the striker
being aware of it.

Warminster was unanimously elected president, and bore his blushing
honours with due meekness.

"Old Sal"--the Philosophers had taken to abbreviating my pet name this
term, I know not on what principle of familiarity--"Old Sal piles it on
a bit," remarked he.  "Of course he couldn't help rotting the club a bit
last term.  That's the way he's born.  But considering what a rank
outsider he was, I suppose he did his best."  (Laughter, and cries of
"What about Jarman's guy?") "Yes, that was a howling mess.  I vote we
keep out of that this term, or leave it to the louts.  I tell you what,"
said he, "I vote we make a show up at the sports next month, and take
some of the side out of those day-boy kids.  They fancy themselves a
jolly sight too much."

"Dicky Brown told me," said I, "they were sure of both the jumps and the
Quarter-mile and the Tug--and that Selkirk's were going to pull off the
others, all except the Half-mile Handicap; and we may get that, he says,
because they'll probably give us fifty or sixty yards' lead."

"Howling cheek!" exclaimed every one in furious rage.  The idea of being
given sixty yards' start in a half-mile by a day boy was too much even
for a Philosopher.

Whereupon we solemnly considered the list of events "under 15," and
divided them out among ourselves, with a vow to eat our heads if we
didn't pull off as many for Sharpe's as all the rest of the school put
together.

We decided to postpone making our entries till the last moment, so as to
delude the enemy into the impression that we were shirking the sports
altogether.  Then we would, as Warminster politely put it, "drop down
and rot the lot."

Before we adjourned for the night the question of Tempest and Crofter
came up, _a propos_ of a report, which some one mentioned, that Tempest
had entered for the Open Mile against Redwood, and was expected to prove
a warm customer.

"Is Crofter in?"

"No--Pridgin is, but of course he won't come up to scratch, and Wales
only enters for the show of the thing."

"Crofter couldn't look in at Tempest over the Mile," said Langrish, "but
he ought to enter, for all that."

"Can he look in at Tempest over anything?" said I.

"Don't ask questions, and you won't be told no whoppers," astutely
replied Trimble.  "I wonder if he expects us to back him up?"

"I sha'n't," said one.  "Nor shall I," said one or two others.

"I vote we let him alone," said Coxhead.  "What's he got to do with us?
When does he come across us?  Only when there's a row on.  He's got
nothing at all to say to us at other times."

"You mean, if we want to let him alone we shall have to shut up rows?"
inquired Langrish.  "Rather rough, isn't it?"

"Not if he knows the reason," suggested I.  "Let's send him a round-
robin and let him know."

"Not half a bad idea."

Whereupon the following candid epistle was concocted and signed by all
present:--

"To T.  Crofter, Esquire, Captain Sharpe's _pro tem_., etcetera,
etcetera, etcetera.

"Dear Crofter,--We the undersigned Philosophers wish to say we're going
steady this term on our own hooks, and hope you will not think it's
because of you.  We don't want to be interfered with by any chap except
old Tempest, who ought to be cock of Sharpe's, so we've decided to go
steady, so as not to be interfered with, because we would rather not you
interfered with us, because we're all serene and are backing up Tempest,
and hope he'll pull off the Mile that you've not entered for.  We aren't
down on you, because you pulled Tempest through last term, but it's
rough you're cock of the house instead of him, and therefore on that
account we are going steady, so as not to give you the fag of
interfering with us, which we don't mind Tempest doing because we
consider he has more right to interfere with us than you.  Hoping you
are well and in good health, as this leaves us, Believe us, with kind
regards to all at home, Yours very kindly and in alphabetical order, so
that you needn't know who started this letter.  Samuel Wilberforce
Coxhead, Thomas Jones, Everard Langrish, Jonathan T.  Purkis, Alfred
James Remington Trimble, Percy Algernon Warminster, and others."

This important document, the writing of which, I grieve to say,
necessitated frequent reference to the English Dictionary, Langrish, as
Crofter's fag, undertook to deliver, and faithfully discharged his
mission by leaving it on the captain's table when he was out of his
study.

It was decided to resist the temptation of sending Mr Jarman a similar
explanatory letter, for fear it might lead to a row which would call for
interference.  Nor was it deemed prudent under the circumstances to
commit ourselves in writing to Tempest, whom we hoped to convince of our
loyalty by cheering him on every possible occasion and otherwise making
things pleasant for him.

How Crofter enjoyed his letter we none of us knew.  He was inconsiderate
enough to give no sign of having received it; and still more
inconsiderate to allow himself on more than one occasion to be publicly
complimented by the doctor and Mr Sharpe on the order of the house.

Meanwhile the Philosophers stuck to their new programme.  I had the
satisfaction of pulling down Langrish from his place on the top desk at
the end of the first week, and he had the triumph of recovering his seat
at the end of the week after.  In the seclusion of the faggery we
indulged in a few mild recriminations, which were the natural outcome of
our rivalry; but they only served to blow off steam, and we were too
keen to win our self-imposed battles in class to allow personal feeling
to interfere much with our work.

Mr Sharpe was fairly astonished, and took off his glasses, and rubbed
his mild eyes as he read over our really meritorious exercises and
listened to our sometimes positively coherent feats of construing.

Secretly, too, but with great precaution, and in spots far removed from
the detection of the day boys, we practised grimly at jumping and
sprinting and record-breaking generally, and finally, as the critical
time for making our entries approached, agreed upon the particular
exploit which each of us was to undertake for the honour and glory of
Sharpe's house in general and Philosophy in particular.

Before that time arrived, however, one awkward incident occurred, to
remind me I had even yet not quite purged myself of the follies of last
term.  I stumbled against Crofter just outside his door.

"Come in," said he.

I obeyed, guessing that at last we were to hear something of our famous
letter.

I was disappointed, however.  Crofter made no reference to it, but
said--

"Those bills you paid for me last term, Jones iv.--did none of the
people allow you any discount?"

"Discount," said I, "what's that?  We haven't got to it yet in Syntax."

"Don't be a young ass.  Did none of them give you any change?"

"Rather, all of them.  I brought it back, or used it to pay the rest."

"What I mean is, you didn't make anything out of it for yourself, did
you?"

"Me--oh!" the conscious blushes suddenly mounted as I grasped his
meaning.

"Yes, you."

"Well, only, you see, it was--"

"Come, no lies.  I know all about it.  Did you or did you not?"

"Not from the hat man," said I.

"From all the others?"

"Only--"

"Yes or no, that's what I want to know."

"Yes, but--"

"That will do.  Now I understand why you were so pleased with the job.
It's a profitable thing to help a friend sometimes.  Tempest will be
amused when he hears."

"Oh, I say, don't--really I didn't fancy--"

"That will do, I say.  Cut--do you hear?  I only wanted to know whether
I was right or not in what I told Tempest."

"Oh, but--" pleaded I, with a groan of misery.

"If you don't cut I'll lick you for disobedience."

This, after all my good resolutions and hopes that all was squared and
that before long Tempest would believe in me again!

I slunk away in despair, and curled myself up in my bed that night, the
most miserable boy in Low Heath.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

PRETTY WARM ALL ROUND.

"Dicky, old chap, I'm in a howling mess."

"The same old one, or a new one?"

"It's about those blessed bills of Tempest's--I wish I'd let them alone.
You see, it was this way.  How was I to know?  I'm sure I never meant
to do anything shady."

"I dare say not, but what _are_ you talking about?"

"Why, I've been regularly let in.  You see, I--"

"Look here, old chap, let's hear what it is," said the practical Dicky.

"Why, the fact is, most of the chaps wanted to stand me something when I
squared up with them, and Crofter tries to make out I'm a thief, and
he's going to show me up to Tempest."

"But you didn't let them?"

"Well, yes, one or two.  You see, Marple gave me a pencil-sharpener, and
Rammage a strawberry ice, and Ringstead a net-bag and spikes--jolly bad
ones too, they all came out in a week."

"And does Crofter say you swindled him or Tempest?"

"I didn't think I was swindling anybody," said I evasively.

"You made a pretty good thing out of it, though."

"I know.  I say, Dicky, what's to be done?  I thought I was going to
pull round all square this term--really I did--and now I'm in a regular
fix."

Dicky pondered.

"It was a bit shady," said he, with his refreshing candour; "the sort of
thing Ananias and--"

"Oh, for pity's sake, Dicky, if that's all you've got to say--"

"It's not.  I think you'd best make it good somehow.  Can't you give
them back?"

"How can I give back the strawberry ice?"

This was a poser, certainly, and set Dicky thinking again.

"Have you got the other things?" asked he.

"No; the pencil-sharpener smashed first time I used it, and the net-bag
got lost at home."

"Awkward.  You'll have to buy new ones."

"Who for?"

"Tempest, of course.  They were his bills."

"But it was Crofter's money."

"But Tempest has paid him back."

The result of this conversation was, that instead of practising for the
Quarter-mile that afternoon I went down town with a bag, and expended
five shillings of my term's pocket-money in the purchase of a pencil-
sharpener, a strawberry ice, a net-bag, and a set of patent screw
spikes.

Dicky, like a brick, undertook to convey these to Tempest, with the
following letter, which I wrote at his suggestion.

"Dear Tempest,--I send you back the change I got out of the bills I got
last term.  I'm sorrier than I can say, and hope you won't hate me more
than you do.  Dicky will tell you how jolly blue I am, and how we all
hope you'll win the Mile.  We aren't backing up Crofter, and hope you'll
soon be captain again.  Please excuse me writing, but I don't like to
come and tell you this, as you're so down on me.

"Yours truly,--

"T.  Jones iv."

I also penned a further letter for Crofter:--

"Dear Crofter,--You needn't mind telling Tempest, as I've done so and
paid him back.  With thanks all the same,--

"Yours truly,--

"T.J. iv."

I felt vastly easier in my mind when this polite letter was at an end,
and when I saw the faithful Dicky depart to execute his brotherly
mission.  My one fear was lest the strawberry ice should get warm before
it reached its destination.

I waited in vain for any sign of response from Tempest.  The
Philosophers went down during the afternoon to watch him training for
his race; but he vouchsafed us no regard, and, for all I knew, still put
me down as a thief and a sharper.  Dicky, whom I met later on, explained
that he had failed to catch Tempest in his study, but had deposited the
articles along with the letter on his table, so that, if he did not know
of them yet, he soon would.

My anxiety was not at all allayed by a casual encounter with Crofter in
the evening.  He summoned me into his study, where I saw my _billet-
doux_ lying on the table.

"I suppose you wrote this?" said he.

"Yes."

"And you think everything's clear now, do you?"

"Isn't it?" said I.

"I dare say Dr England will be able to tell you.  By the way, why did
you only give me 2 shillings 6 pence change instead of 3 shillings 6
pence?"

"There was only 2 shillings 6 pence to give."

"Really?  I thought so too till your clever management of the tips
tempted me to look over the bills again.  I see that what you paid only
came to £4 16 shillings 6 pence, instead of £4 17 shillings 6 pence.  I
don't want the other shilling, but hope you bought yourself something
nice with it.  You must consider it a present from Tempest, not me."

I timed red and white in the sudden confusion of that announcement.  I
was positively certain 2 shillings 6 pence had been the change, and that
if there was any mistake it must be on the part of the tradesmen, not
me.  But how was I likely to convince Crofter, or, for the matter of
that, Tempest, that such was the case?

"I promise you," said I, "I only had 2 shillings 6 pence change.
Really, Crofter, do believe me."

"I believe every word you say," said Crofter, with a smile.  "I have
every reason to, haven't I?"

"But, really and truly--"

"What's the use of saying any more?  Of course, it's all really and
truly.  I've no doubt Tempest believes it too."

"Please let me see the bills," pleaded I; "I'll show you I'm right."

"Unfortunately Tempest has them.  I dare say he will be delighted."

"You haven't told him about this, have you?"  I gasped, in helpless
misery.

"I'm going to; it's too good a joke to be kept to myself; I don't
suppose he'll mind.  Certainly he won't be surprised."

"Oh, Crofter, for goodness' sake, don't tell him this!" said I,
blundering on into an appearance of guiltiness of which I was quite
innocent.  "I'm wanting so awfully to be friends with him again.  I've
given him back all I got out of the shops; and it will spoil everything
if you tell him this, really--it isn't true either."

Crofter laughed pleasantly.

"It's rather likely I should shield you, isn't it? when all this term
you and your friends have been insulting and defying me, and setting
yourself to upset my authority as captain of the house."

"Oh, but we aren't!"

"What does this precious thing mean?" demanded he, producing the famous
round-robin; "it's meant to be all politeness, I suppose."

"It only means," faltered I, "that we are sorry Tempest is not captain."

"Naturally.  It's nice to have a captain one can swindle and rob, isn't
it?"

I groaned miserably--it seemed no use trying to put myself right.

"If you chose to be civil and back me up, it would be different," said
Crofter.

"But we are--we're going as steady as anything," said I.

"What do you mean by going to Pridgin and Wales and Tempest for _exeats_
and special leave instead of to me?" he demanded.

This was a point I was unprepared for.  It was true that the
Philosophers, in their desire not to be interfered with by the new
captain, had made a point of applying, as they were entitled to do, to
any of the other prefects of the house in preference to Crofter for
_exeats_ and occasional leave to go without bounds.  It had always been
considered the prerogative of the captain of the house to grant these;
but, strictly speaking, the other prefects had the right too.  I tried
to explain as much.

"Of course," said he, "it is a very neat way of ignoring my authority.
I expect you to come to me.  I shall not refuse any reasonable request,
but I'm not going to be insulted in my own house."

"But--" said I.

"There is no 'but' about it.  If you want to prevent your being shown up
to your friend as an amiable young swindler, you can stop it by
undertaking that you and your lot will do what I tell you.  If not, it
is your own look-out, that's all."

Luckily the school bell enabled me to get away without giving any
pledge.  Fool as I was, I knew what all this meant.  It was an attempt
to buy us all over at the cost of that unlucky shilling, and with it to
secure Crofter in the authority which he so dearly coveted, but so far
so imperfectly enjoyed.

The Philosophers, as might be expected, waxed very indignant when I made
a clean breast of the whole matter.  With their usual frankness they
quite admitted that I might have pilfered the shilling.  That sort of
thing, they remarked, was quite in my line, and in keeping with my
character generally; and they hoped to live to see me hung.  But as to
caving in to Crofter as the cost of my shelter, they drew the line at
that.  He had no right to impose new rules, or take away the immemorial
privileges of the "Sharpers."  Besides, if they gave in on this point,
they would immediately have to go and ask his leave to practise for the
Sports in Callow Meadow, which was just out of bounds, and where, in
strict seclusion, diligent practice had been going on for a week, with
most promising results.

I was thereupon ordered to write a laconic rejoinder to the tempting
offer, the Philosophers promising to back me up in the matter of the
shilling and see me through it.

With a heavy heart, therefore, I sat down and penned the following brief
epistle, which was approved by the faggery and ordered to be laid on
Crofter's table before bed-time.

"Dear Crofter,--We all think it's not good enough.  It's all a lie about
the shilling.  Yours sincerely, T.J. iv."

Some of the Philosophers demurred to the sentence about the shilling,
which appeared to commit them to an opinion they did not hold.  But I
had my way for once, and retired to bed, when all was done, wondering
whenever peace would come, and I and my friend should rejoice to see one
another again as of old.

I do not know how soon I fell asleep.  It must have been pretty soon;
for I can remember seeing Crofter come into the dormitory and turn out
the gas; and I can remember in the general stillness hearing voices and
the noise of poking the fire in Mr Sharpe's room downstairs.  After
that I forgot everything, until suddenly I discovered myself awake
again.

Things seemed strange as I slowly turned my head on the pillow and
blinked up with half-opened eyes.  The dormitory seemed hot and stuffy;
somebody or something was making a noise, and I wished they would stop.
I could see nothing, except the hazy outline of my shirt hanging on the
back of the chair, and even that seemed to come and go as I watched it.
I was indisposed to move, and my mind was half asleep still.  The one
thing I did long for was for the noise to stop and some one to open a
window.  It was simply choking; I could hardly breathe, and--

Suddenly my shirt seemed to turn red, and by the lurid light it emitted
I could see smoke coming over the top of the door.  Then the side of the
room grew red too, and seemed to close in on me, getting redder and
redder as it did so, till finally by a frantic effort I raised myself in
my bed and yelled--

"Fire!"

The answer was a great volume of smoke, which leapt out at me like a
savage beast and sent me back on to the pillow; a deafening roar
outside, and a sudden blaze, which half-blinded me and stifled the cry
that was on my lips.

That is all I can remember distinctly.  I was vaguely conscious of
hearing my name called, of seeing my door move, of everything whirling
round and round, and finally of falling, or getting, or being dragged
out of bed.

The next thing I was aware of was that I was lying in a strange bed,
with a headache, but otherwise tolerably comfortable, though awfully
thirsty, and as weak as a mouse.

"Water, please," I remarked at large.

Instantly a face bent over me--a strangely familiar face, which after a
moment's reflection I told myself was my mother's.

It was such a surprise that I forgot about the water, and took a nap
instead.

In due time I must have woke again, this time by candlelight.

"Mother, are you there?"

"Yes, darling; what is it?"

"My shirt caught fire, and--"

"Hush, dear.  Don't try to talk."

I didn't quite see why.  I was really curious about several things.  In
fact, I thirsted for information.

"Why mayn't I talk, mother?"

"Because you've been ill."

"Did I get doctor's leave?"

"Yes, dear."

"Mother?"

"Well, sonny darling."

"How did you get here?"

"They sent and told me you--"

"You didn't believe about that shilling?  Really there was only 2
shillings 6 pence change."

"Yes, yes, dear.  Hush now, there's a good boy."

"Mother?"

"Well, Tommy dear."

"Was there a fire last night?"

"It was a week ago, sonny."

"Who was the fellow called me?  Was he riled at me for not answering?"

"Oh no--you were almost suffocated."

"Where shall I sleep now?  Have they mended my cubicle?"

"You'll sleep here, dear.  All the boys are over here."

"Was all the dormitory on fire, then?"

"Yes; but thank God every one was saved."

"Is Langrish all right?"

"Oh yes, all of them are."

"Will he be game for the High Jump?"

"Surely, surely--but you're talking too much, sonny."

"Mother?"

"What is it, darling?"

"Does Tempest know I've been ill?"

"Yes," and her eyes seemed to fill with tears as she bent over me.

"Will you tell him about the shilling?"

"Yes, if you like."

"Mother, why are you crying?  Is Tempest ill too?"

"No, dear--but--"

"Tell us, mother."

"If it had not been for Tempest," said she, "I should have had no boy
to-day."

"Did he get me out, then?" said I, getting thoroughly aroused.

"Yes, Heaven bless him for it!" she replied, kissing my forehead.

"That'll be a score for him," said I; "I'm so glad."

My mother evidently did not quite understand this point of view, and
concluded I had been talking more than was good for me, and once more
implored me to be silent.

But I had no notion of giving up my inquiries at this stage.

"Did he get hurt doing it?"  I asked.

"Only his hand a little."

"How did he get at me?"

"Every one thought you were safe out of the burning room with the
others.  When it was found you were not, Tempest rushed back before any
one could stop him, and carried you out.  He had not got outside with
you more than a second or two when the roof and staircase and all fell
in."

Here she shuddered as once more she bent over me and kissed me.

This was all I wanted to hear at present, and I closed my eyes in order
to think it over the better.

My chief sensation was one of exultation that Tempest should risk his
life for me.  It meant that I had won him back in spite of myself.  Then
when I recalled the frightful blaze and noise of that night, I began to
realise what my rescue must have meant to any one.  No one but a fellow
utterly scornful of danger, and utterly determined to save a life in
peril at all cost, could have ventured into that place.  _He_ would have
done it for any one, I knew; but to come deliberately after me, who had
ruined his chances last term, and whom he despised as a pilferer and a
sneak--this was an act of heroism which it baffled me to contemplate,
and in the contemplation of which consequently I succumbed once more to
sleep and forgot everything.

As I slowly got better (and, after all, I was not much damaged, as soon
as I had got over the effects of the suffocation and terror of that
awful night) I heard more about the fire.  Permission was given me to
see one friend a day for ten minutes at a time, and the reader may
imagine the wild excitement of those ten minutes.

I naturally called for Dicky Brown as my first man.  He came, looking
rather scared, and was evidently relieved to find I was something better
than a mass of burns, and able to do my share in the conversation.

"It was a close shave for you, I can tell you," he said.  "All the other
fellows hopped out long before the fire got bad, and no one fancied you
weren't out too.  You must have been sleeping jolly sound.  All of a
sudden one of your lot yelled out that you were missing.  It was so hot
then the fellows were all standing back, but old Tempest, almost before
the chap had shouted, nipped into the middle of it, and made a dash for
your cubicle.  My word!  I wish I'd been there to see it!  You were as
good as done for when he collared you and hauled you out.  He fell with
you half-way down the stairs, but Sharpe and Pridgin and one or two
others caught him and fished him out with you over his shoulder.  He
swears he's not damaged, but he's got his hand in a sling.  I say, old
chap, it's no use blubbing; it's all right how."

"I wasn't blubbing," said I.  "When you've got a cold in your head your
eyes water sometimes, don't they?"

"Rather, buckets," said the magnanimous Dicky.

Langrish was my next interviewer; and his account as an eye-witness was
graphic, and not calculated entirely to cure my "cold in the head."

"You see, it's this way," said he.  "Jarman was smoking in Sharpe's
room, and chucked his cigar into the waste-paper basket or somewhere by
mistake, and while he and Sharpe toddled across the quad, the thing
flared up and went up the curtains, and when old Sharpe came back the
whole place was in a blaze.  I twigged it pretty sharp, and so did Trim,
and there was a regular stampede.  No one ever supposed you'd go snoring
all through it.  Crofter and Wales were first outside, looking as white
as milk.  Bless you, it was such a rush and shindy, no one could see
anybody.  Of course we made sure you were all serene.  Think of you
sleeping through it!"

"I was in the end cubicle, you see," said I.

"For all that, you might have stuck your head out to see what the fun
was about," said Langrish, in rather an aggrieved tone.  "Sharpe turned
up presently, with his face all grimy with smoke, and yelled, 'Is every
one here?'  'Yes,' said Crofter--silly ass, how could he tell?  Then
Coxhead said to me, 'Where's Sarah got to?'  That made me look round,
and I can tell you I was pretty sick when I couldn't see you.  Just
fancy a chap sleeping away through it all!  Why, the ant and the
sluggard," said Langrish, getting a little mixed in his proverbs,
"weren't in it with you.  So I yelled 'Sarah!' with all my might.  You
should have seen the chaps sit up when they heard your name.  Then old
Tempest, with his mouth shut and looking middling pasty about the face,
broke through the scrimmage and sent us right and left, and made a
regular header into the place.  Sharpe yelled to him to come back; some
tried to yell, but couldn't for lumps in their throats, and we all
closed up.  I can tell you it was a hot place.  The smoke rolled out and
got in our eyes, and the wood and stuff cracked and blazed, and sounded
like the waves at Dover.  We never expected to see him or you come back.
The stairs were going to bits as fast as they could, and great bits of
burning wood were tumbling off the roof.  Then the smoke shifted
somehow, and we heard Sharpe yell, 'Heavens!'  Then there was a dull row
like something tumbling, and Pridgin and Sharpe dashed in.  We got kept
back, or we'd have given you a leg-up too.  Then you strolled in, fast
asleep still--I never saw such a snoozer!--on Tempest's arm.  He was
pretty well done, and couldn't have pulled it off if Sharpe and Pridgin
hadn't hiked him out.  Even then he couldn't stand.  So I hope you're
jolly well pleased with yourself.  I hope it will be a lesson to you,
young Sarah, to keep one eye open while you're asleep.  We were jolly
glad you got canted out, though you _are_ a bit of a mule.  But it would
have been rough on you to miss the Sports.  They say Tempest's burned
his hand pretty bad, but he means to have a shot at the Mile.  I say,
Redwood was asking after you.  Jarman's jolly sick that it was his fault
about the fire.  He's been quite civil, and been to ask about you every
day.  Look sharp and get right, I say, or it'll rot the Sports if you
don't.  Hullo, there comes your _mater_.  Ta, ta, old hoss.  It's rather
ripping you scraped through all right."

He was a good sort, Langrish.  He did not tell me, what I heard later,
that at the time of the fire he had to be held back by main force from
following Tempest in quest of me; and that he had rather a "cold in his
head" when he saw me hauled out safe and sound.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

"SMALL AND EARLY" IN THE SANATORIUM.

My recovery was far too rapid to please me.  I never had such a jolly
time in all my life.  My mother was in and out all day; there were no
lessons.  I was allowed to summon any chum I liked to my bedside.  I was
receiving messages daily from masters and seniors, and, best of all, I
had nothing the matter with me except, a strong disinclination to exert
myself, and an occasional headache or dizziness when I sat up.

I had come up to Low Heath that term with the honest determination to
"lie low."  I little expected, however, that I should find myself quite
so literally adhering to my resolution.

My one trouble was that all this time I had not seen Tempest.  I did not
like to send for him, in case he should not appreciate the compliment.
And he, as I guessed, would not care to come of his own accord for the
uncomfortable ceremony of receiving my thanks.  My mother told me he had
often asked about me; but when she asked him to come and see me he had
replied,--"I'll see him as soon as he gets about again."  When she
inquired about his hand he had replied airily that it was all right, and
he was only keeping it in the sling to get it right for the Sports.
"But," said my mother, "I wish he would let the doctor see it, or give
up running till it is well."

"But," said I, "he's a chance of winning off Redwood."  This argument,
which in ninety-nine cases out of one hundred in Low Heath would have
been absolutely conclusive, failed to impress my mother in the least.
She attached no importance to "winning off Redwood" compared with a
boy's health, and obdurately protested that if she were Tempest's mother
she would not allow him to think of running.

It was only my agitated appeals to her not to interpose that prevented
her speaking to Dr England about the matter, and so knocking the race
on the head altogether.

I took it as a compliment to myself that the Sports had been put off a
fortnight in consequence of the fire.  That warm event had so upset
everything and monopolised so much attention that Low Heath would not
have come up to scratch at all on the day originally fixed.  And whereas
the new date permitted of my being present to assist--though, alas! not
to compete--in the day's proceedings, I felt specially satisfied with
the alteration.

I had naturally heard a good deal of Philosophical gossip during my
convalescence.  On my last evening in hospital especially, there was
quite a symposium.

My mother, in an innocent moment, had remarked, "I should so like to
have one or two of your friends to tea, sonny, before I go home.  The
doctor says it will not do you any harm--and we can have them in here,
as you are the only invalid in hospital."

"That'll be ten, with you and me," said I.

"Do you want quite so many?" asked she, beginning to get a little
concerned.

"Must have the lot or none," said I decisively.  "We can cut out
Rackstraw and Walsh, if you like--they're paupers."

"Oh, Tommy!" said the dear, tender-hearted one, "if they are not as well
off as--"

"Oh, that's not it.  They can shell out as well as anybody; only they
got on our club for nothing on condition of towing the boats, cleaning
up, and that sort of thing."

"At any rate, let us have them," said my mother.

"All serene.  Will you write the invitations?  I say, mother, do you
mind writing as well as you can?  Our chaps are rather particular, you
know, and I wouldn't like them to snuff up at you."

My poor dear mother began, I think, to repent of her hospitable offer,
but decided to go through with it now.

So she got eight nice little sheets of scented invitation note, with
envelopes to match, and wrote,--

"Mrs Jones requests the pleasure of Mr Alfred James Remington
Trimble's company to tea in the Sanatorium parlour this evening at 6
p.m.;" and so on, in each case.

My suggestion to add "R.S.V.P." and "Evening dress _de rigueur_" she
thought it best to decline.  But her kind leniency was thrown away, for
within half an hour eight notes dropped in upon us, couched in the
politest phraseology.

Here was Langrish's, for instance:--

"Everard Langrish, Esquire, begs to thank Mrs Jones for asking him to
tea at six sharp, when he will be very pleased to fall in with her
wishes and be of service in any other way her better feelings may
dictate."

Langrish told me afterwards he cribbed this last sentence out of a story
he had read in a weekly newspaper.  He rather fancied it was "on the
spot."

Trimble's was less romantic:--

"Dear Madam,--I accept with thanks.  Sarah gets rather outside
sometimes, but we do what we can for him.  Till then,--

"I am yours affectionately,--

"A.J.R.  Trimble."

Warminster's was, no doubt, meant to be impressive:--"The President of
the Philosophical Conversation Club presents his compliments to Mrs
Jones, and desires to inform her of his intention to wait upon her at
the hour named in her letter.  He trusts that Mrs Jones is in good
health, and that her ailing child will be spared to her a little longer.
Having several matters to attend to, the President of the Philosophical
Conversation Club must now abruptly terminate, namely, Percy Algernon
Warminster."

The ending seemed to me decidedly weak compared with the rest.  I will
only give one more--that of Coxhead:--

  "Dear Mrs Jones, I'll come to tea;
  At six o'clock you shall me see.
  I'm sorry Sarah's been laid up
  And drinks his physic from a cup.
  Unless unto the contrary I hear.
  My Eton suit I think I'll wear.
  And now 'farewell,' as great John Knox said.
  Yours truly, Samuel Wilberforce Coxhead."

This effusion struck me as rather like cheek; but my mother seemed to
like it.

As evening approached I began to grow very nervous, and have to confess
that my mother was the cause of my concern.  I was so afraid she was not
properly impressed with the gravity of the occasion--that perhaps she
would not be dressed at her best--or that the tea might not be up to the
mark--or that for any cause the fellows should consider they had been
"done."  I'm sure I wearied the life out of her by my inquiries as to
the nature of the jam, as to whether the cake would go round twice,
whether any of the teacups were cracked, whether the nine chairs ranged
round the little room were all sound on their legs, who would open the
door to let them in, whether my mother would mind not proposing juvenile
games like table-turning, or clumps, and whether when the time came for
them to go she would mind not looking at her watch or yawning, for fear
they should think it a hint.

All which points the dear soul faithfully promised should be borne in
mind and attended to, with a little quiet banter at my expense, which
helped to remind me that, after all, one's mother may be trusted not to
disgrace a fellow, if left to herself.

In due time she presented herself in her Sunday dress, looking very
pretty and smart--quite creditable, in fact.  The tea also, as it
appeared laid out on the sideboard--I had urged, by the way, that it
should be served in party style, and not partaken of round a table--
looked a well-found meal for the most exacting of Philosophers.  I
myself reposed in state in bed, arrayed in my Eton jacket and best
collar and choker.  The fire in the hearth was both cheerful and
adequate, and the knowledge that the Sanatorium maid was downstairs in
her cap and clean apron, to show the young gentlemen up, finally
relieved my anxiety.

In due time there was a ring, and a sound of the funereal tramp of
eighteen feet on the staircase, and I knew that Mrs Jones's party had
begun.

They all trooped in together, looking very grave and shy, and spick and
span in their full-dress, and evidently on their good behaviour.  My
mother shook hands with each in unexceptionable style, repeating his
name as I announced it from the bed, and expressing her pleasure at
making his acquaintance.

The sight of me propped up on my pillows, somewhat pale still, and as
shy as themselves, seemed to impress them a good deal, and added to the
funereal character of the entertainment.  A long pause ensued, broken
only by the entrance of the maid with the teapot, and Langrish's remark
to Trimble that it was a fine day.

Then my mother had the wit to observe that she hoped it would be equally
fine on the day of the Sports, and she was so sorry she would miss them,
as she understood Mr Sharpe's house was likely to win a good many of
the events, and of course her sympathies were entirely that way.

This went down beautifully, and drew from Coxhead the remark,--

"It's a pity Sar--I mean Jones iv.--is out of it.  He might have got the
Quarter-mile."

"Are the names down yet?"  I asked.

"Yes.  We stuck them down to-day," said Langrish.

"Any one else in for the Senior Mile?"

"No; only Tempest and Redwood."

Another pause--everybody evidently meditating what my mother would like
to hear next.

My mother meanwhile moved to the sideboard and began to pour out tea.

"Do you take cream and sugar?" she said, with a pleasant smile, to
Langrish.  How relieved I was she did not call him "Everard" or "dear!"

"Yes, please--can I pass round?" he replied.

It was admirable.  I had been in terror lest he would have collared the
first cup and stuck to it.

"Thank you, if you will, please.  I see they are beginning to get your
old house ready for rebuilding."

"It won't be ready this term, though," said Warminster; "it will take--a
slice of cake, thanks."

"No sugar for me, thanks," said Coxhead.  "I wonder if Jarman will have
to pay for it?"

"Does your _mater_ take cream and sugar?" said Purkis to me, in an
aside.

"I shouldn't think so," said Langrish, "because he didn't do it on
purpose, you know."

"Thank you very much.  Do you mind putting it down there?  And won't you
sit down?" said my mother, setting the example.

"I expect he'd better give up smoking, as he's always setting things on
fire," ventured I.  "Mother knows about the guy last term, don't you,
mother?"

"Yes, indeed," said she, with a laugh, which won over the Philosophers
in a body.  "That was a lucky escape for everybody.  I was horrified."

"Well, old Sar--I mean Jones iv.--"

"I think he understands his nickname better than his real name," said my
clever parent.

"Old Sarah," said Langrish, getting rapidly at his ease, "let us in for
that.  You see (cake up, please), it was this way--"

And he launched forth into an account of that famous adventure, into
which the company one by one cut, at my expense, of course, and highly
to the diversion of my mother.

Meanwhile the teapot was kept busy, and the jam went its rounds--some of
it on to Coxhead's shirt-front--and by the end of it all the
Philosophers found themselves comfortably at home.

"I say," said I, when a break came, "how's the club getting on?
Anything fresh?"

Langrish glanced round at my mother.

"I've got the minute-book," he said, "would she--"

"Oh, do!" said she.  "Is it an account of your meetings?  I would like
to hear it immensely.  Debating societies are such capital things, I
think."

"It's a bit down on Sarah, though," said the secretary, dubiously.

"Why, I wasn't there," said I.

"Weren't you? that's all."

"Let's hear it," said my mother, "I dare say he deserves it."

I forgave the dear traitress for giving me away like this, for I felt
sure the minutes would save our evening.

"You see," said Trimble, "we try to keep it fair, so it's down on some
of the others too.  But Sarah gets it a little the hottest."

"I'm used to getting things hot by now," said I; "forge ahead, and sit
where I can shy the pillow at you."

Whereupon Langrish moved his chair to a conspicuous place, and read,--

"'A meeting of the Ph.C.C. was held in dormitory on February 1, at 9
p.m.'"

"Why, that's when the fire was," said Trimble.

"Shut--I mean what's that got to do with it?" retorted the secretary.

"Well?" said my mother, taking a stitch or two at her needlework.

"'Owing to the side put on by the ex-president, who was lately, kicked
out for being a howling cad, and because he was down in form order--'"

"What a cram!"  I interposed; "I was on the second desk, and should have
had you down weeks ago if I hadn't been laid up."

"Ha, ha, I like that--you!  Did your _mater_ ever hear about _corpore_
being the ablative masculine, eh?"

"No, I never heard about that," said my mother.

"All right--Sarah will tell you--where was I, oh--down in form order,
though he's not quite such a crock as Coxhead, who is champion dunce in
Low Heath--"

"Me?" exclaimed Coxhead, warm with tea and indignation.

"There you are," said Langrish, "anybody but a champion dunce would have
said 'I.'  You ask Sarah's _mater_ if they wouldn't."

"Well, _you_, if you like," said Coxhead; "what about it--"

"Look here, how can I read the minutes when--here we are--'crock as
Coxhead, who is champion dunce in Low Heath.'"

"What happened then?" said my mother, looking a little mixed.

"'He was shunted to an outside berth, and was out of it.'"

"I rather think I was in it," said I; "never mind."

"Oh, if you think so, all right.  The minutes say you were out of it.
'He'd not begun to snore many minutes with deafening effect, when, as
might be expected, Jarman set fire to the show to stop the noise.'"

"Do you think that's why he did it, really?" asked Warminster.

"Look here, young Warminster.  I don't _think_, I--"

"Pity you don't now and then," remarked the newly-elected president.

Langrish looked hard at his colleague, and then glanced at my mother,
whose face was bent over her work.  Whereupon the secretary threw the
minute-book at the president's head, and observed,--

"Look out, Warminster; hand up that book, can't you--it's not yours."

My mother looked up, and Warminster meekly surrendered the book.

"'--Stop the noise.  The club then adjourned, all except Sarah, who hung
on, contrary to the rules, and is hereby fined 2 shillings 6 pence.'"

"Oh, I say," protested I, "that's rather rough, isn't it?"

"'But,'" proceeded Langrish, "'owing to his mother coming up to buy him
off, he is hereby let off with a fie-- I mean a warning.'"

"Thank you so much," said my mother, gratefully.

"'When we thought he was pretty well warmed up, we sent Tempest in to
fish him out, which he accordingly did, and is hereby elected honorary
porter to the club, and is backed to win the Mile.'"

"That's the least he deserves, surely," said my mother, with feeling.

"'Sarah, owing to this unprincipled conduct, has been suspended for a
month, and the club hereby hopes some day not far off to see him sus--'
no, that's wrong--I mean--"

"Hung," suggested Trimble, in an audible whisper.

"Order--turn him out for saying hung, instead of hanged," said the
president.

"Shut up, can't you?" said the secretary, "can't you let me finish the
sentence? '--See him sus--susceptible of better emotions.'"

"Hear, hear," said the club, breathing again to see the corner turned.

"I hope that's not all," said my mother.

"That's as far as we've got; but we'll let him down easy in the next,"
said Langrish.

"The next will have the account of the Sports, I suppose," said my
mother.

"If our men win," said Warminster.  "We're bound to win the High Jump if
Langrish keeps on his form; he did 4 feet 1 and a half inches this
afternoon."

"You needn't talk--you're all right for the 100 Yards," said the modest
Langrish; "there's no one in, except young Brown of the day cads, who
can touch you; and he's sure to go a mucker on the day."

"Don't be too sure of that," said I.  "Dicky Brown doesn't go muckers if
he can help it."

"There you are--backing the town cads now.  I move, and Mrs Jones
seconds, that Sarah be, and is hereby, kic--I mean sat upon by the
club."

"Oh, don't, please," said my mother, "the bed is not strong enough."

"All right--it's lucky for Sarah.  If you were half a chap you'd see we
didn't lose the Quarter-mile.  Rackstraw will have a look in at it, but
it'll puzzle him to beat Flitwick.  Walsh is going to cut out for him.
So we may just do it; but it'll be a go--eh, paupers?"

Rackstraw and Walsh both protested there would be no difficulty about it
if only the track was in good order, and their wind held out, and
Flitwick muddled his start, and finished a yard or two behind.  We were
all prepared to stake the glory of Sharpe's on these trifling
conditions.

Presently the preparation bell began to toll, and the party broke up
with a cordiality and cheerfulness which contrasted strangely with the
solemnity with which it had begun.  My mother was politely requested to
become an honorary member of the club, and as politely consented,
expressing a hope that she might meet with its honourable members many
times again.

When they had gone she told me how much she had enjoyed the evening, and
how she liked every one of them, and hoped they wouldn't think her rude
to have laughed now and then, but really, she said, not being used to
it, she could not help it.

Next day she left, and, dismally enough, I made the first use of my
liberty to accompany her in the fly to the station.  She talked to me,
as only she could, about the future, and the spirit in which she thought
I would take up once more the work of the term and the thankfulness
which she the widow, and I the orphan, could not help feeling to the
Heavenly Father, who had saved us both from such peril and sorrow in the
past.  She urged me to show my gratitude for my escape, by seeking to
follow more closely in the footsteps of that Saviour to whom she had so
often taught me to look for help and guidance, and at the same time she
urged me to pray for the guidance of the Holy Spirit.  Her goodness only
made my sorrow at parting the greater; and more than any time since I
had entered Low Heath, the pangs of home-sickness fell upon me as I saw
her into her carriage.

Just before the train started I felt my heart beat suddenly, and the
blood rush to my cheeks, as I saw a figure, with one hand in a sling,
running up the platform, looking into one carriage after another.

"Mother, here's Tempest!"

Next moment he saw us, and ran up.

"I heard you were going by this train," said he, "and I thought I would
like to say good-bye."

"Good-bye, my dear boy, and God bless you once more!"

"The youngster's all right again, I see," said he, putting his hand on
my arm.  "I'll see he takes care of himself--good-bye."

And the train steamed off, leaving us two on the platform.

"I hope your hand's not awfully bad," said I, breaking a silence of
nearly three months in the only way which occurred for the moment.

"Rather not.  We'd better cab it back--you're not up to walking yet."

"Thanks awfully, Tempest, for saving--"

"Look here, don't let's get on to that," said he.

"I say," said I, "I was afraid you believed what Crofter said, and
thought--"

"You were an ass, Tommy--you always were--I ought to have remembered it.
Of course I never believed a word Crofter said--I saw his game.  But I
was idiot enough to get riled at you for giving yourself away to him.
I'm sorry.  Now let's forget it.  After all, it was the best thing for
me that all that row about my bills came out when it did.  You did me a
better turn than you meant to do.  Just like you--if you try to do
things the right way, it's all up with everybody.  But if you do them
your own way, they manage to come round somehow."

"But Crofter's done you out of the captaincy."

"So much the better--I didn't deserve it.  I'll get it back some day
perhaps, and work it better.  Come in to me to tea.  Redwood's coming,
and old Dicky, too."

"But you're against Redwood for the Mile," said I.

"That's no reason why I shouldn't give him a cup of tea, is it, you
young mule?"

The way he said it, and the grip of his hand on my arm, satisfied me
that all was square once more between me and my dear old Dux.



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

A DEAD HEAT.

The few weeks during which I had been laid up had witnessed some curious
changes in Low Heath--at least, they seemed curious to me, dropping, as
I did, suddenly into them.

First of all, we poor "Sharpers" were all burnt out.  The faggery was no
more, nor was the hall, or the dormitory.  We were being put up
temporarily in a town house just outside the school gates, a good deal
to the wrath of some of our number, who felt it was putting them down to
the level of the day boys.  However, the sight of the scaffolding round
our old quarters, and the cheery clink of the trowel, reminded us that
out exile was not for long, and that in a brand-new faggery, on brand-
new chairs, and round a brand-new table, we should shortly resume our
pleasant discussions on the deepest questions with which the human mind
can occupy itself.

Somehow, apart from the fire, things weren't going exactly as I had left
them.  Pridgin was reported to be working hard--a most alarming symptom.
It was commonly surmised that he could not stand playing second or
third fiddle to Crofter; and as Tempest was apparently content to be
second, Pridgin had come to the painful conclusion that the only
comfortable place for him in Sharpe's was Number One.  It was extremely
inconvenient all round; for it made it necessary for Crofter to bestir
himself, while of course it seemed to threaten Tempest's chance of
recovering his place.

A few of the shrewdest held that Pridgin was merely forcing the pace in
order to punish Crofter for his usurpation.  It may have been so; but,
whatever the motive, it quite upset the normal flow of things at
Sharpe's.

Another change was a marked reaction of public opinion in favour of
Tempest and against Crofter.  This was probably due, in the first place,
to Tempest's exploit in rescuing me from the fire; and secondly, to
Crofter's caution in declining to enter for the Mile race at the coming
Sports.  A few weeks had dispelled the little glamour which the latter
had derived from his apparently public-spirited conduct last term, and
the attitude of the Philosophers had effectually deprived him of any
opportunity of exercising his authority, and left him to the enjoyment
of an altogether barren honour.

One other change was that Tempest's necessity to live very economically
in order to repay his grandfather for advances made, had produced a
coolness between him and Wales, who had now retired from the
triumvirate, and attached himself to the cause of Crofter.

Lastly, Mr Jarman had suffered a shock, and taken on badly about his
accidental part in the recent fire.  It had knocked all the vice out of
him, for the time being at any rate, and left him quite meek and limp.

Just now, however, the only topic about which any one cared was, as I
speedily discovered, the Sports.

Unusual keenness was being displayed everywhere.  The seniors were
deeply concerned in the issue of the Mile.  Would Redwood, who had
hitherto held his own easily, save his laurels this time?  Would
Tempest, with his damaged hand, be able to run his hardest?  Would any
dark horse, at the last moment, enter to divide the interest?  And so
on.

Among the middle boys considerable excitement was afoot, especially in
Selkirk's house, where it was reported a boy of fifteen and a half was
going to beat the senior record in the Jump, and perhaps run the public
school record very close.

But the chief excitement was among us juniors.  We had modestly set
before ourselves the task of winning every event under fifteen for
Sharpe's house, to say nothing of pulling the day boys over the chalk in
the Tug of War, and generally bringing the Philosophers well before the
public notice.  The secret of our intention had been well-kept till
within a week of the day.  We had been taunted with shirking our sports,
with being "mugs" and "crocks" and "cripples," with exercising the
better part of valour, with being afraid of being laughed at, and so
forth.  But we heard all with a conscious wink, and went on with our
practice round the corner.  Then, a week from the day, we literally
pelted the list with our names.

Langrish put down for the High Jump, Cricket Ball, Broad Jump, and
Hurdles.  Warminster set down his name under Dicky Brown's for the
Hundred Yards, and next to Griswold's for the Hurdles.  Coxhead entered
for the Cricket Ball against the crack thrower in Selkirk's, and
Rackstraw and Walsh, noble pair of "paupers," put in for the Quarter-
mile, which I was to have run against the fleet-footed Flitwick.
Altogether it was a big order, and made the other houses look a little
blue, as we hoped it would.

The great day came at last--a perfect Sports day, with a light breeze
blowing, the track like elastic, the takes-off clean and sharp, and the
field crammed with visitors and friends.  I had my work cut out for me
that day.  It would have been far less exertion to run the Quarter-mile.
I was to be coat-minder, time-keeper, rubber-down, straight-tipper,
clapper-on-the-back, and bottle-holder to the Conversation Club at
large, a sort of mixture of parent, footman, and retriever dog, which,
flattering as it undoubtedly was to my sense of my own importance,
promised no little anxiety and exercise before the day was done.

As I strolled down somewhat early, charged with the pleasing commission
of "bagging nine seats in the middle of the front row of the stand and
seeing no one collared them," I met Redwood, fresh as a daisy, just
returning from a final inspection of the ground.

"Hullo, youngster, you're not running, I hear.  What a pity!"

"It doesn't matter," said I.  "Do you mind my not backing you for the
Mile?"

He laughed, and said he should have thought poorly of me if I had not
backed my own man.

"Is his hand all right now?" he asked.

"He says so," said I.  "It's worth six yards to you, though."

"You think so, do you?" said he.  "By the way, will you do a job for me?
My two young sisters awfully want to be on the ground, and they've got
leave if some one will look after them.  I can't.  How would you like
to?"

Here was a thunderbolt!  I had a fair day's work mapped out for myself
as it was.  Now I was to be saddled with a pair of teasing young female
fidgets, and held responsible for their good behaviour and general
comfort!  What did people take me for?  Why, the Mile itself wouldn't
take it out of me half as much.

"All right," said I, "where are they?"

"I'm going home; I'll send them down sharp before the crowd comes.
Thanks awfully, youngster."

And off he went, leaving me pretty full up with the cares of this
deceitful world.

I proceeded to bag the nine best seats on the stand, which, as nobody
else had yet put in an appearance, was easy enough without the trying
necessity of sitting on them all at the same time.  When the crowd
arrived, it would be time enough to consider how I should then have to
act.

I had not been long in possession when two dainty little figures in pink
bore down hand-in-hand upon me, presumably under the protection of a
nurse, who, however, was not in it when it came to racing.

"There's horrid Sarah," remarked Mamie, "who tried to drown me."

"Never mind," said Gladys, "he was nearly burned to death to punish him
for being wicked."

"I hate him because he never gives us sweeties," said Mamie.

"Never mind," said Gladys; "Bobby says it's not his fault that he's a
mule.  I don't like mules though, do you?"

"I hate them," said the uncompromising Mamie.

"Please, Master Jones," said the nurse, "the mistress says will you see
the young ladies behave nicely and don't dirty their frocks?  Be good
girls now," she added, by way of final admonition, as she departed.

I watched her go with the helpless despair of a man on a spar who
watches the lifeboat put off with its last load for the shore.  The
young ladies, almost before nurse was gone, began to run along the rows
of chairs, falling down once in twelve, and rapidly toning down the
pretty pink of their frocks to a sombre brick hue.  I was thankful when
the crowd began to drop in, and I was able, by threats of taking them
home before the races began, to reduce them at least to the nine seats
for which I was responsible.  How I wished I had some sweets, in order
to reduce them to only three!

By good luck Dicky Brown hove in sight just as I was giving way to
despair.

"Dicky, old chap," said I, "if you love me, get sixpennyworth of bulls'-
eyes or something.  I'd be grateful to you as long as I live."

Dicky looked at me anxiously--evidently concerned for my health.  But a
jerk of my head in the direction of the two little vixens, who were just
then trying to pull a solemn-looking day boy off one of the chairs by
main force, satisfied him that the case was an urgent one, and, like a
brick, he flew off to the rescue.

The solemn day boy stood his persecution as long as he could, and then
rounded sharply on his persecutors.

"Bother you, go away!" he growled.

Whereupon in floods of tears, the Misses Redwood made for me, and
insisted on being taken up one on each knee and "cosseted" because of
what the big ugly boy had done.

I complied with the energy of despair, conscious that in so doing I was
allowing the reserved seats one by one to be usurped, and was at the
same time rendering myself a spectacle of contempt to at least eight
young persons, whom, in the gap left between the two wet faces which
clung to my either cheek, I could see advancing in a body, clad in
running drawers and blazers, in our direction.

It was vain for me to try to escape from my false position.  The nearer
the Philosophers approached, the more maudlin and effusive these
unprincipled young females became, flinging their arms tragically round
my neck, and bedaubing my face with their dewy kisses.

"Sarah _can_ go it a bit when he likes," said Langrish, with a cheerful
guffaw, standing in a conspicuous place, and calling public attention to
me in a way which only added to my sorrows.

"Rather.  I wondered why he went down so early," said Coxhead.

"Birds of a feather," said the sententious Trimble, "play the fool
together.  I say, what about our seats, though?"

"They are bagged," said I, getting my face clear for a moment.  "I
couldn't keep them."

"I dare say.  You mean you were so busy spooning about with girls you
never thought of it.  All right, Miss Molly," said Warminster.

"I think we could squash up a bit here," said I meekly.

"Looks as if _you_ could," said Langrish.  "Squash away then."  And, to
the wrath and indignation of the whole stand, the Philosophers crowded
in, in a solid phalanx, and proceeded to accommodate their eight persons
in the space usually allotted to two.  It took some time for the other
seat-holders to appreciate the humour of the manoeuvre, and before then
the bell had rung for the first race, and Dicky had returned with the
brandy-balls, which he deftly smuggled into my hand as he trotted past.

It was now easy to "square" the Misses Redwood, who for a blessed half-
hour cried truce.  It was in vain that I suggested that they had better
not plaster their faces and frocks more than could be helped with the
sticky substance of their succulent pabulum.  They contemptuously
ignored my right to make any suggestion of the kind, and I finally
abandoned them to their fate.

The first few events were trial heats, in which we as a body were not
specially interested; but when the bell rang up for the Hundred Yards
under fifteen, the Sports had begun for us in earnest.

Leaving the two Daughters of Eve with the bag of brandy-balls between
them, I clambered out of my place to perform the last rites for
Warminster, who was to carry the colours of Sharpe's against Dicky Brown
of the day boys, Muskett of Selkirk's, and another outsider.

It went a little to my heart to be rubbing down somebody else's calves
but Dicky's on an occasion like this.  But such is life.  Patriotism
goes before friendship, and times do come when one must wish confusion
to one's dearest brother.

So I rubbed down one of Warminster's calves while Trimble rubbed the
other, and Langrish gave him a word of advice about his start, and
Coxhead arranged to call on him for his spurt twenty yards from the
finish.  With the exception of the other evening when he arrived at my
mother's party I had never seen Warminster so meek and nervous.  He
behaved exactly as if we were taking a last farewell, and would, I
think, have embraced us had we encouraged him to do so.

"Now then," said Langrish, "give us your blazer.  Bend well over your
toes for the start, and do it all in a breath."

"Run straight on your track, and don't try to take the other chaps'
water," said Trimble.

"Don't look round at me when I yell, but bucket all you can," said
Coxhead.

"Don't pull up till after the pistol has gone," said I.  Then we left
him to his work.

And well enough he did it.  He and Dicky went off at the start as if
they'd been shot out of a double-barrelled gun, Dicky with his head
down, our man with his head up.  That was what saved him; half-way over
Dicky had to get his chin up, and it lost him a sixteenth of a second,
and that meant six inches.  Selkirk's man made an ugly rush thirty yards
from home, but he began it too soon.  Warminster wisely waited till he
heard Coxhead's shrill "Gee-up" in his ear.  Then he laid on and made
his six inches eight, and his eight ten, and landed so much in front of
Dicky amid cheers which, if the clouds had been a little lower, would
have assuredly brought on a shower.

One score to us!  I was sorry for Dicky, but it couldn't be helped.
"It's your fault," said he, "the brandy-balls did it.  I took one, you
know; never mind.  I say, look at your kids!"

The "kids" in question had finished the brandy-balls, and, resenting my
desertion, had decided to follow me into the open.  As I had reached it
by swarming over the front of the stand and dropping a foot or so on to
the earth, they naturally selected that route as most suitable for them.
They had half accomplished it, to the extent of getting over the edge
of the low parapet and beginning to lower themselves on the outside,
when Mamie's frock caught in a nail, which suspended her between heaven
and earth, while Gladys, in her uncertainty whether to scream or assist,
had toppled to the ground all of a heap, and solved the difficulty that
way.  Their screeches almost put our loyal cheers to the blush, and when
I rushed up to extricate the one and pick up the other, I was in the
centre of a hullaballoo which almost threatened to wreck the Sports.
How they quieted down I know not.  I believe it was my announced
determination to walk them straight home which did it.  At any rate, it
was clear to me there was no more rubbing down of Sharpe's calves for me
that day.  I must remain, like Casabianca, on deck, even though it cost
us all the events of the day.

It was a thankless task.  First of all there was the usual ceremony of
"cosseting" and drying tears.  Then with a pin I had to mend the rent in
Mamie's frock.  Then I had to kiss both of Gladys's elbows to make them
well, and finally I had to stand a fusillade of chaff and jeers from the
Philosophers, which made life a heavier burden that it was already.

At last, to my joy, the bell rang up for the High Jump under fifteen,
and public attention was diverted from my lamentable case.

As everybody who knew anything had anticipated, Langrish won this,
metaphorically speaking, "on his head."  He knocked out the second man
(a Selkirker) at 4 feet and half an inch, and went on gamely 2 inches
higher, clearing the bar as prettily and daintily as Wales himself might
have done in the open event.  It was not at all certain he could not
have gone higher against an opponent; but having no such spur, he grew
careless, and after barely shaking down the bar twice at 4 feet 3
inches, kicked it off awkwardly the third time, and so retired an easy
victor, and quite overcome by the applause of the now crowded field.

Then came the event of the day--the Open Mile, for which Tempest and
Redwood were the only combatants.  I felt myself growing as nervous as
if I were running myself.

For my instinct told me that the welfare of Sharpe's more or less hung
on the issue.  Could Tempest but win, there would be no doubt that he
would return to the headship of the house with an eclat which even
Crofter would have to yield to.  If not, Crofter might still hang on to
the reins and claim his doubtful rights.

A complication of an unexpected kind arose now.  The Misses Redwood were
quite sufficiently _au fait_ with the etiquette of a race-course to know
that if their brother ran he must win, and that everybody else must wish
him to win.  In an unguarded moment I joined in the cheer which greeted
Tempest as he appeared stripped for action on his way to the starting-
post.  This was taken up as a grievous personal affront.  The young
ladies repudiated and flung me from them with an energy and disgust
which quite astonished me.  They loudly clamoured for my removal, and
failing that, made a concerted retreat from my detested vicinity.

"Nasty horrid Sarah, go away!" they shouted.

Then spying Dicky Brown in the distance, they shrieked on him to deliver
them.

"Want to go _to Dicky_--dear Dicky.  Get away from Sarah."

And suiting the action to the word they swarmed over the back of the
bench, and started in full cry for the enviable Dicky.

Richard, however, was an old bird for his years, and did not, or
pretended not to hear their siren voices, and sheered off into the open
just in the nick of time.  Whereupon the Misses Redwood redoubled their
clamour, and could only be allured back to the shelter of my fatigued
wing by my going to them and audibly bawling in their faces, "Bravo,
Redwood! go it, Redwood!"

On these terms they surrendered, and the difficulty, at the cost indeed
of my reputation as a loyal "Sharper" was temporarily tided over.

It was noticed that Tempest, though cool as ever, was pale, and carried
his left hand, while he stood waiting, in the opening of his waistcoat.
I saw Redwood go to him and say something, pointing as he did so to the
hand.  Tempest's reply was a flush and a laugh as he removed his hand
from its resting-place, and waved it about at his side.

I did not like it.  But it was too late now.  Mr Jarman stood ready
with his pistol up, the noise of the field suddenly changed to silence,
and the two athletes, with arms out, stood straining on the line.

Off!  It was a good start, and the pace was startling for a mile.
Tempest had the inside track.  He seemed to have the advantage in
lightness of step, while Redwood's strength was more in length of
stride.  The first of the four laps was run almost inch for inch.
Perhaps Tempest, thanks to his berth, had a foot to the good as they
entered on the second.  Here our man forged ahead slowly, and gradually
drew to a clear lead.  But we trembled as we saw it.  Would he stay?
Apparently he ran as lightly as before, but Redwood, as he lay on at his
heels, seemed to be going even easier.  However, the half-mile saw
Tempest three yards ahead and still going.  Then, to our concern, we saw
Redwood's stride lengthen a little, and watched inch after inch of the
interval shrink, until at the end of the third lap there was scarcely
more difference than there had been at the end of the first.  Yet our
man was still to the front.

And now it was almost difficult for us onlookers to breathe, for the tug
was at hand.  The fourth lap had scarcely begun when a wild yell called
attention to the fact that Tempest was once more "putting it on."  What
was still more satisfactory was that he was going as well as ever,
although in that respect so was Redwood.  The gap opened again, the foot
grew to a yard, and the yard to half a dozen, and the half-dozen to-- At
last!  It was but two hundred yards from home when Redwood's stride once
more lengthened out, and a new shout told us all that the chasm was once
more being filled up, inch by inch and foot by foot.  Tempest heard the
shout and knew what it meant.  He, _too_, lengthened his stride, and
seemed as if he was going to answer rush for rush.  But our hearts stood
still and our tongues clave to the roofs of our mouths as we perceived
that it would not come off.  He could barely keep up his present pace.
Would it see him through?  Perhaps half the distance was passed, and
Redwood had only recovered a third of his lead.  Then the yells broke
out.  Every one wished he could lend his man an inch, or the hundredth
part of an inch.  Redwood's rush increased, and the vanishing inches
struck panic into our philosophic breasts.  Could Tempest but hold out
these few yards, we were safe.  He would!  No!  Yes!  No, they're all
but level another six yards.  Then suddenly we saw Tempest fling his
hand behind and reel forward with a blind stagger over the tape, and as
the simultaneous report proclaimed a dead heat, fall sprawling and
helpless on the ground.

The cheers died on our lips, for it was surely something more than
exhaustion or broken wind.  Redwood was beside him in a moment, and drew
his head on his knee.  It was a dead faint--not from fatigue, but from
pain.

His burned and blistered hand, which he had so carefully concealed from
everybody, and of which he had made so little, betrayed the secret
plainly enough.

For once his pride and determination had overrated his physical
strength.  He had calculated on just being able to win the race.  All he
had done was just to save it, at a price which, as it turned out, was to
cost him weeks of illness, and even threaten the loss of a hand.

The news of his calamity spread like wildfire, and put an end, as far as
I at least was concerned, to the sports for the day.

We heard later in the day that he was in the Sanatorium in a high fever.
Next day he was delirious, and the notice on the board told us that the
doctor considered his condition dangerous.  The next day, his old
grandfather, the only relative he had, came down, and the next, summoned
by my urgent message, my dear mother.  Then for a day or two we were
kept in suspense, till one happy afternoon the bulletin reported a
change for the better, and presently the welcome news came that all
danger was past.

For me at least that was the happiest day of my life, except perhaps
that a week later when my mother as a special privilege allowed me to
see him for a moment.

He was sitting up in bed, smiling but pale.

"Tell me," he said, "I've never heard yet, did I win the Mile?"

"Dead heat," said I.

"What time?"

"Four four and a half."

"A record, isn't it?  It was worth the grind."

I had my doubts, but knew better than to say so.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

A GOOD SHOW-UP ALL ROUND.

It was the last day but one of the Summer term, and the Philosophers
were in a ferment.  The lists were to be out in the afternoon, and a
score of events were to be decided by them.  Was I to get on to the top
form of my division, and if so, was it Langrish or Purkis who was to be
displaced?  Or was I, after all my grind, to yield a place to the
truculent Coxhead?

More than that, was Warminster to be beaten after all by a day boy
called Dicky Brown, who, amid all the changes and distractions of the
term, had stuck doggedly to his work, and was reported a hot man for the
head place in the junior division?

All this was exciting enough, but it was as nothing to the tussle at the
head of the school.

Pridgin's alarming burst of work in the Easter term had, contrary to all
expectation, not died out.  Every one prophesied he would sicken of it.
Wales laughed at him.  Crofter smiled sweetly.  Tempest inquired
frequently after his health, and even Redwood knocked off some of his
extra cricket to keep pace with it.

"What are you trying to do?" asked Tempest one day, as his friend looked
in.

"Nothing, my dear fellow, only amusing myself, I assure you."

"You have a queer idea of fun.  Do you know, I've hardly been out on the
river all the term, owing to you."

"Don't let me prevent you, old chap.  The exercise will do you good."

Tempest laughed.

"I hope yours will do you good.  But two can play at your game."

"Two!  Half a dozen.--I've not got my knife into _you_, though."

"Who?  Crofter?"

"Rather.  I see no other way of taking it out of him.  He shirks sports,
and takes his pound of flesh out of the captaincy, although he knows
he's no right to it, and no one, not even the rowdies in the faggery,
respects him."

"That's why we're going steady," said I, "just to rile him."

"The only way to take it out of him is to make him sit up, and harry
him," said the amiable Pridgin.  "I only hope, though, it won't land me
head of the house.  I'm depending on you to beat me.  But I'm not going
to play second fiddle to Crofter."

"It will serve you right if it does land you head," responded Tempest.
"If it does, we'll have to keep you up to the mark and see you don't
shirk."

"Don't say that, old chap, or I shall jack it up," said Pridgin, putting
his feet upon the window-ledge.  "Besides, does it occur to you that
Redwood's leaving, and that the second man up, if he's one of us, is
left not only captain of Sharpe's but captain of Low Heath?"

"I know," said Tempest quietly, "but they say Leslie of Selkirk's is in
the running for that."

"Stuff and nonsense!" retorted Pridgin.  "Tempest of Sharpe's is the man
for my money."

Tempest laughed again; but it was a sort of laugh which did not bode
well for Leslie of Selkirk's.

This talk had been a fortnight ago.  Since then the examinations had
come and gone.  The Philosophers, sobered and perspiring, had been
spread out at two-desk intervals on three fatal days in the large hall,
with day boys to right of them and Selkirkers to left, writing for their
lives, and groaning over questions which only a fiend could have
devised, and only a double-first could have answered.  How I had got on,
I could no more tell than the man in the moon.  My comrades, when we
compared notes afterwards, cheerfully assured me that, out of some fifty
questions on the three days, I had possibly got half a question right,
but that that was doubtful, and depended on the particular crib the
examiner swore by.  Redwood, to whom I confided some of my answers,
thought rather more hopefully of my case, and told me to keep my spirits
up.  Tempest said that if he were to cuff me for every discreditable
blunder I had made, I should have ear-ache for a month.  Dicky, on the
other hand, confessed that he wished he could believe he had done as
well as I.

As for the other Philosophers, general discouragement was the order of
the day.  It was moved and seconded that Coxhead be kicked for having
made "amnis" feminine, and having translated the French "impasse" as
"instep."  And Trimble was temporarily suspended from the service of the
Conversation Club because he had put a decimal dot in the wrong place.
Public feeling ran so high that any departure from the rules of syntax
or algebra was regarded as treason against the house, and dealt with
accordingly.

On the whole, therefore, we were glad when the time of suspense came to
an end.

How matters had gone with the seniors it was even more difficult to
surmise than it had been in our case.  The day after the end of their
exams., Redwood and Tempest, with Pridgin to cox, rowed twelve miles
down stream and back, and returned cheerful and serene, and even
jocular.  Leslie of Selkirk's also spent a pleasant afternoon in the
school laboratory, whistling to himself as he mixed up his acids.
Crofter and Wales mooned about under the trees in the field somewhat
limply, but showed no outward signs of distress.  Altogether,
speculation was baffled, and it was almost irritating to find the chief
actors in the drama refusing to take the momentous question seriously.

"How did you get on?"  I asked Tempest.

"You'll hear to-morrow," said he; "so shall I."

"Do you think you'll beat Leslie?"

"Either that, or he'll beat me, or it'll be a dead heat," said he.

There was no dealing with frivolity of this kind; and Tempest, ever
since his recovery last term, had been rapidly regaining all his old
frivolity and lightheartedness.

It was a trying ordeal on "Result" day, sitting patiently in hall till
the doctor made up his mind to appear.  All the school was there.  There
was an unusual spirit of orderliness afoot.  The few irresponsible ones,
who, with nothing to lose, tried to get up a disturbance, were promptly
squashed by the grim, anxious competitors to whom the coming results
meant so much.  We Philosophers huddled together for comfort, but not a
joke travelled down the line.  We sat and drummed our fingers on the
desk before us, and wondered why on earth the doctor, on a day like
this, should take such an unearthly time to put on his cap and gown.

At last he appeared, paper in hand, and glasses on nose.  I could see
Dicky just in front of me catch a quick breath, and Tempest up in the
front brush his hair back with his fingers; and there arose before my
mind in horrible review all the palpable blunders of my own examination
papers.

"Lower school," began the doctor in a hard, dry, unemotional voice.
"Aggregate form order--out of a possible 1000 marks, Brown iii., day
boy, and Jones iv., Mr Sharpe's, bracketed first with 853 marks."

What! me? bracketed top with Dicky?  Go along with you!  But a huge
thump on the back from Warminster, followed by a huger from Langrish;
the vision of Dicky's consciously blushing cheeks, as Flitwick performed
the same office for him; and, above all, a nod across the room from
Redwood, and a grin from Tempest, convinced me that there was something
in it after all.  Of course it was a mistake, and when the marks came to
be counted again it would be put right.  But while it lasted it wasn't
bad.  What was the doctor saying?

"A very good performance, both of you; and the result of honest hard
work."

It was true then?  There was no humbug about it?  Oh, I must write to my
mother this very afternoon.

"Warminster, Mr Sharpe's second, 836, good also; Corderoy, Mr
Selkirk's, third, 815; Langrish, Mr Sharpe's, fourth, 807; Trimble, Mr
Sharpe's, sixth, 796; Purkis, Mr Sharpe's, seventh, 771; Coxhead, Mr
Sharpe's, eighth, 734--(Mr Sharpe's boys have worked excellently this
term);--Quin, day boy, ninth, 699; Rackstraw, Mr Sharpe's, tenth, 678."

And so the list went on.  I was too much lost in the wonder of my own
success to appreciate all at once the glorious significance of the whole
result.  But as the Philosophers crowded in a little closer on one
another, and the friendly nudge went round, it began to dawn on me.
Every one of our men had given a good account of himself, even Coxhead
and the "pauper" Rackstraw!  Not one of the old gang but was eligible
for the club; not one but had done something to "put the day boys and
Selkirk's and everybody else to bed," as Langrish said.

"Just like your side," said the latter to me, "trying to make out you'd
made a mess of it.  You can only make a mess of it, young Sarah, when
you try not to; when you do try you can't do it."  And with another
thump on the back our excellent secretary gave me to know he bore me no
malice, but on the contrary was pleased to favour me with his general
approbation.

But more was yet to come.  Compared with the "aggregates," the details
of how we had passed each examination were more or less tame, and we
were impatient to get on to the senior results.

The middle school had to come first.  As a rule we were not greatly
concerned in them, except as belonging to the division into which some
of us would probably be promoted next term.  But such as they were, they
kept up the credit of Sharpe's.  A Selkirker did indeed head the list,
but after him a string of four of our fellows followed; after them a day
boy, and then two more "Sharpers."

More back patting, crowding up, conscious blushes, and congratulations.

Then the doctor put down one paper and took up another; and every one
knew what was coming.

"Upper school," read the doctor in exactly the same voice, as if this
announcement were of no more importance than any other.  "Aggregate form
order--out of a possible 1000 marks, Redwood, captain of the school, and
day boy, 902."

We were obliged to interrupt a little here.  There would not be many
more chances of cheering old Redwood, and we couldn't afford to chuck
them away.  So we cheered, and gave the doctor time to polish up his
glasses and take a sip of water.

"Your cheers," said he, when at last we had relieved ourselves, "are
well-deserved.  In addition to this capital result, Redwood takes the
Low Heath scholarship to Trinity, where, I almost venture to prophesy,
we shall hear even greater things of him some day."

More cheers.  But we were too impatient to hear what came next to
interpose too long a delay.

"Tempest, Mr Sharpe's, second, 888; all the more gratifying when we
remember the causes which interrupted his school work for a time last
term."

We fairly gave ourselves away now!  Sharpe's had reached the top of the
tide with a vengeance.  There was an end to all uncertainty as to who
would be its captain; and there was the glorious certainty that the
captain of Sharpe's would also be captain of Low Heath.  Three cheers!
Rather.

But still we could not, till the rest of the list was read, give
ourselves up to cheering for as long as we should have liked.  So we
allowed the doctor to proceed.

"Pridgin, Mr Sharpe's, third, 869--very close."

Good old Pridgin!  All his discomfort had not been for nothing.  He had
"taken it out of" Crofter, after all.  By how much?

"Leslie, Mr Selkirk's, fourth, 832.  Wales, Mr Sharpe's, fifth, 801.
Crofter, Mr Sharpe's, sixth, 769."

A cool hundred between them!  We had the decency not to rub it in too
hard.  It was clear by the disconcerted look in the face of our so-
called captain that he was more surprised than any one.  He smiled, of
course, and leant across to pat Pridgin on the back.  But that was just
his way--we knew well enough that it cloaked a bitter mortification, and
why worry the poor beggar with letting him see we noticed it?

So we waited till we got outside, and then let ourselves loose on
Tempest and Pridgin, and positively injured our voices with cheering.

That afternoon in the faggery our jubilant review of the situation was
combined with a wind-up meeting of the Conversation Club for the term.

"Jolly good show for us," said Langrish.  "Crofter's pretty sick, but
it'll do him good.  I move and third, and Sarah seconds and fourths,
that we send him a resolution of condolence."

"Better let him alone," suggested I.

"Shut up, or you'll get jolly well kicked out of the club," said the
secretary.  "If you don't want to be civil, it's no reason why we
shouldn't."  I had imagined I was on the whole more concerned for
Crofter's feelings than they, but, putting it in the way they did, I
could hardly resist.  So the following resolution was solemnly drawn up
and ordered to be conveyed to "The late Mr Crofter."

"That this meeting of the Philosophical Conversation Club is hereby
jolly glad to see Tempest cock of the house again, with Pridgin second
man up.  It hereby condoles with Crofter in the jolly back seat he has
got to take, and is sorry he shirked the Mile.  It begs to inform him
that he is a hundred and eighteen marks behind Tempest, and trusts he
will in future obey the house captain, to whom all applications for
_exeats_ and extra leave are to be addressed.  Crofter need not trouble
to reply, as the club only desires to have communication with the cock
of the house."

This done, I was ordered to take the chair as the new president, and
called upon the secretary to read the minutes.

These were short and to the point,--

"'A general meeting of the Conversation Club was held on Monday in the
Examination Hall.  With his usual mulishness, Sarah thought he'd have a
cut in, and it was resolved to give him a chance.  Thanks to the
drivelling idiotcy of Warminster, who doesn't even know the feminine
genitive of _corpus_, he scraped through; and, as he couldn't do much
worse than Coxhead, he did a shade better.'"

"All very well," growled Coxhead, "he did a jolly sight better than
you."

"'Coxhead, who is hereby expelled for using slang, was, as usual, down
with the paupers at the bottom.  A town cad called Brown, who managed to
conceal his cribs, came out first, and it was decided to tack Sarah on
to him.  Trimble, as might be expected, came a cropper in his English
grammar--'"

"A cram!  They never examined us in it!"

"There you are; you don't even know it when you see it--'came a cropper
in his English grammar.'"

"I tell you I didn't," expostulated Trimble.  "Shut up."

"Shut what up?"

"Yourself."

"Come and shut me."

A warm argument ensued, which knocked over the table, and was only
composed by my reminding the club that we didn't want to disturb the
peace of the new cock of the house on his first night.

"All right," said Langrish, "where was I?--'English grammar.  Purkis,
not having paid his subscription, naturally came out too low to be
classed, but to give him a lift he was allowed to be stuck in between
Trim and Coxhead, who being outsiders at the best of times, had plenty
of room for another.'"

"All very well--what sort of howler did _you_ come?" asked the outraged
Purkis.

"'It being considered well to stick one Selkirker into the list, the
hon. secretary made room for Corderoy, and is hereby thanked on his
retirement.'"

"Hullo!" said I, "don't say that, Langrish."

"Fact is," said Langrish, dropping the minutes, "I've got to.  I've gone
down, you see."

"Oh, but you've worked like a cart-horse.  I move, Trim seconds,
Warminster thirds, Coxhead fourths, Purkis fifths, and the paupers
sixth, that old Lang be and hereby is perpetual secretary of the
Ph.C.C., and that it's all rot his retiring."

"Oh, all serene," said Langrish, evidently pleased.  "That's your look-
out.  Where was I?--'thanked on his retirement, but as nobody else can
read his writing, he is hereby asked to hang on, which he hereby does.
The meeting then adjourned.'"

We decided to celebrate the evening by a state tea, as which the usual
loyal and patriotic toasts were given; of which I will only trouble the
reader with one, that delivered by Warminster, the late president.

"It's a sell, of course, getting down; but we all had a good look in,
and Sal's come out best man this once.  We aren't going to jack it up
though, and he'll have to mind his eye (cheers).  After all, what with
the mess he made over Tempest's bills (loud cheers), and the shindy
about the guy, and all that rot about the barge, he's shown he's fit for
the job (laughter).  But he'll have to make a good show-up for Sharpe's
now, or we'll let him know.  We've scored a bit of a record, and we
don't want to fool it away (loud cheers), and any fellow who doesn't put
it on doesn't deserve to be a Ph.C.C. or anything like (prolonged
applause).  Gentlemen, with these remarks I beg to give the health of
'the army and navy and reserve forces' (loud cheers)."

The "reserve forces" were the most striking feature, after all, about
the wind-up of the Conversation Club that night.

Before I went to bed I looked in at Tempest's study, where, to my
delight, I found Dicky Brown.

"Hullo, I was just coming to fetch you," said the new captain.  "Don't
you think this a pretty good show for old Plummer?"

"Rather," said Dicky.  "I wonder how he's getting on!"

"And I wonder if the pond is full up again yet."

"By the way," said Tempest, "I've never hided you for collaring that
pistol of mine.  I may as well do it now."

"Fire away," said I; "I don't mind taking a licking from the captain of
Low Heath."

"It sounds queer, doesn't it?" said Tempest, disarmed by this
compliment.  "Between you and me, kids, I think we ought to be able to
make the thing work next term."

"Rather," said I, "only we shall have to keep sitting up to do it."

"So much the better," said they.

THE END.






End of Project Gutenberg's Tom, Dick and Harry, by Talbot Baines Reed



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOM, DICK AND HARRY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Christian Religion: An Enquiry
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Christian Religion: An Enquiry

Author: Robert Green Ingersoll


        
Release date: November 22, 2011 [eBook #38093]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/38093

Credits: Produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION: AN ENQUIRY ***




Produced by David Widger






THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

AN

ENQUIRY

By R. G. Ingersoll

INTRODUCTION.

ENGLAND is now for the first time offering to the toiling portion of
its people a fair modicum of the education which was in old time the
exclusive privilege of the rich. In doing so it has acted with a keen
eye to self-preservation, for the history of every fallen nation shows
that the unaided ignorance of the masses has been a principal and fatal
element in its downfall.

This truth would seem to be not yet fully realized by all of higher
education in the country; for the teaching that many of them counsel
for the poor is clogged with ignorance and clouded with error from which
their own higher culture has long been free. It is distressing to see
men who no longer regard the Bible as anything more than a curious
and interesting record, a compound of reflections of ancient myths and
poetry, commingled with a considerable amount of fabulous history and
absurd theology--to see any such man still arguing that for the poor
and for the young it is a necessary subject of study, and (for them) a
useful article of belief!

Do those who argue thus deem the light of reason too clear, too pure,
too delightful, for mankind at large; or is it that they trust that
the useful ignorance of the workers will continue to supply them with
unmerited or unworthy luxuries?

In neither case can the position endure. The refinement of Rome might
loftily echo

     Odi profanum vulgus et arceo:

but Rome has herself fallen; and not on the portals of future science or
of humanity shall any such motto be written. Freedom of Knowledge is
the corollary to Freedom of Thought: in the society of the future
no hierarchy or oligarchy of intellect will close its doors upon the
masses; none will find delight in either sensuous or intellectual
pleasure obtained at the cost of the baser condition of others.

The following Reprint will be found a clear exposition of the
incongruities of creed and record and dogma taught to the poor as a
system of ethics for the whole of their life; and held as a convenient
thing up to a certain age for the young, and especially the female
young, of the moneyed classes.

It is time that such warfare as this should be aggressive; that such
books as the present should be part of the food of our children. Our
truest feelings and our tenderest years have been enslaved to blind
faith, unreasoning credulity and degrading fear; our infant lips have
been trained to link in loving accents the gentle and holy names of
Mother and of Father with that of a God of jealousy, of vengeance, and
brutality; our growing mind has been warned to look to a Hebrew ascetic
as the noblest type of the divine, and to a Hebrew profligate and
murderer as the highest type of the human. As the opening thought of
youth has striven to turn to the light of reason, it has been constantly
threatened back and thrust back into the dark of superstition. It has
been told that eternal misery is the doom of those who leave the
paths of dogma; and it has been falsely and persistently taught that
Free-thinkers are evil and unclean, men without care for right, scoffers
at every good thing.

But it is not scoffers who wage this war of the rational against the
supernatural: let none deceive themselves with that vain thought, or
perpetuate the incorrect assertion. Of such books as the present, such
writings as the present, some at least are the words of men and women
who have been born to, and striven toward a godly life, with intense
effort, with groanings not to be uttered: who, nursed in the bosom of
the Church, and partakers in all her most sacred ordinances, crushed
down as unholy the first and the repeated breathings of doubt and
of reasoning their minds; who held to the falseness of their early
teachings,--till there came that final struggle, when they wrestled with
God,--to hold him,--not to lose him; gasping with fevered lips and shut
teeth and scalding eyelids, "I will not let thee go ": and who won a
blessing they knew not of in that they proved the Jehovah of Hebraism,
the God of Christianity, to be an Apollyon of Superstition: who cast him
off in disgust, in loathing, in half despair; who lay faint and bleeding
through a night of darkness: but to whom, with the dawn, has come the
free and bracing air of reason, and then the deep warm glow of true
life, and humanity, and universal love,--love given this time not to a
fetish, but to every fellow being, to man and beast, to tree and moss,
to stone and star.

With a great price obtained we this freedom, and we will that our Sons
and that our Daughters be free born. To such a liberator as Robert G.
Ingersoll the thanks of present parents are lovingly offered; his
name will be cherished by our children, and his memory hallowed in the
gratitude of generations yet unborn.

B. E.

Rudyard:

9th Month, 1881.




BOUQUET GARNI.

     It is the curse of England that its intellect can see truths
     which its heart will not embody.
     --Laurence Oliphant

     The root of all tyranny and oppression, of all social and
     human ills, is found in witholding from the masses of each
     community mental culture, or knowledge that may be conferred
     on all.
     --Rd. Carlile.

     Atheism leaves to man reason, philosophy, natural piety,
     laws, reputation, and every thing that can serve to conduct
     him to virtue; but superstition destroys all these, and
     erects itself into tyranny over the understandings of men.
     --Bacon.

     A healthy poetic nature wants, as you yourself say, no Moral
     Law, no Rights of Man, no Political Metaphysics. You might
     have added as well, it wants no Deity, no Immortality, to
     stay and uphold itself withal.
     --Letter from Schiller to Goethe.

     Never to blend our pleasure or our pride With sorrow of the
     meanest thing that feels.
     --Wordsworth.

          * A Bouquet Garni is a little bundle of herbs, some bitter
          some sweet, but all salutary.




THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION




I.

A PROFOUND change has taken place in the world of thought, The pews are
trying to set themselves somewhat above the pulpit. The layman discusses
theology with the minister, and smiles. _Christians_ excuse themselves
for belonging to the Church, by denying a part of the creed. The idea
is abroad that they who know the most of nature believe the least about
theology. The sciences are regarded as infidels, and facts as scoffers.
Thousands of most excellent people avoid churches, and, with few
exceptions, only those attend prayer-meetings who wish to be alone. The
pulpit is losing because the people are growing.

Of course it is still claimed that we are a _Christian_ people, indebted
to something called _Christianity_ for all the progress we have made.
There is still a vast difference of opinion as to what _Christianity_
really is, although many warring sects have been discussing that
question, with fire and sword, through centuries of creed and crime.
Every new sect has been denounced at its birth as illegitimate, as a
something born out of orthodox wedlock and that should have been allowed
to perish on the steps where it was found. Of the relative merits of the
various denominations, it is sufficient to say that each claims to be
right Among the evangelical churches there is a substantial agreement
upon what they consider the fundamental truths of the _Gospel_. These
"fundamental truths," as I understand them, are:

That there is a personal _God_, the creator of the material universe;
that he made man of the dust, and woman from part of the man; that the
man and woman were tempted by the _Devil_; that they were turned out
of the garden of _Eden_; that, about fifteen hundred years afterward,
_God's_ patience having been exhausted by the wickedness of mankind, he
drowned his children with the exception of eight persons; that afterward
he selected from their descendants _Abraham_, and through him the
_Jewish_ people; that he gave laws to these people, and tried to govern
them in all things; that he made known his will in many Ways; that he
wrought a vast number of miracles; that he inspired men to write the
_Bible_; that, in the fulness of time, it having been found impossible
to reform man, this _God_ came upon earth as a child born of the _Virgin
Mary_; that he lived in _Palestine_; that he preached for about three
years, going from place to place, Occasionally raising the dead, curing
the blind and the halt; that he was crucified--for the crime of
blasphemy, as the _Jews_ supposed, but that, as a matter of fact, he was
offered as a sacrifice for the sins of all who might have faith in him;
that he was raised from the dead and ascended into heaven where he now
is, making intercession for his followers; that he will forgive the sins
of all who believe on him, and that those who do not believe will be
consigned to the dungeons of eternal pain. These--it may be with the
addition of the sacraments of _Baptism_ and the _Last
Supper_--constitute what is generally known as the _Christian_ religion.

It is most cheerfully admitted that a vast number of people not only
believe these things, but hold them in exceeding reverence, and imagine
them to be of the utmost importance to mankind. They regard the Bible as
the only light that God has given for the guidance of his children; that
it is the one star in nature's sky--the foundation of all morality, of
all law, of all order, and of all individual and national progress. They
regard it as the only means we have for ascertaining the will of God,
the origin of man, and the destiny of the soul.

It is needless to enquire into the causes that have led so many people,
to believe in the inspiration of the Scriptures. In my opinion, they
were and are mistaken, and the mistake has hindered, in countless ways,
the civilization of man. The Bible has been the fortress and defence of
nearly every crime. No civilized country could re-enact its laws, and in
many respects its moral code is abhorrent to every good and tender man.
It is admitted that many of its precepts are pure, that many of its laws
are wise and just, and that many of its statements are absolutely true.

Without desiring to hurt the feelings of anybody, I propose to give
a few reasons for thinking that a few passages, at least, in the _Old
Testament_ are the product of a barbarous people, In all civilized
countries it is not only admitted, but it is passionately asserted, that
slavery is and always was a hideous crime; that a war of conquest
is simply murder; that polygamy is the enslavement of woman, the
degradation of man, and the destruction of home; that nothing is more
infamous than the slaughter of decrepit men, of helpless women, and of
prattling babes; that captured maidens should not be given to soldiers;
that wives should not be stoned to death on account of their religious
opinions, and that the death penalty ought not to be inflicted for
a violation of the _Sabbath_. We know that there was a time, in the
history of almost every nation, when slavery, polygamy, and wars of
extermination were regarded as divine institutions; when women were
looked upon as beasts of burden, and when, among some people, it was
considered the duty of the husband to murder the wife for differing
with him on the subject of religion. Nations that entertain these views
to-day are regarded as savage, and, probably, with the exception of the
_South Sea Islanders_, the _Feejees_, some citizens of _Delaware_, and
a few tribes in _Central Africa_, no human beings can be found degraded
enough to agree upon these subjects with the _Jehovah_ of the ancient
_Jews_. The only evidence we have, or can have, that a nation has ceased
to be savage is the fact that it has abandoned these doctrines. To every
one, except the theologian, it is perfectly easy to account for
the mistakes, atrocities, and crimes of the past, by saying that
civilization is a slow and painful growth; that the moral perceptions
are cultivated through ages of tyranny, of want, of crime, and of
heroism; that it requires centuries for man to put out the eyes of
self and hold in lofty and in equal poise the scales of justice;
that conscience is born of suffering; that mercy is the child of the
imagination---of the power to put oneself in the sufferer's place, and
that man advances only as he becomes acquainted with his surroundings,
with the mutual obligations of life, and learns to take advantage of the
forces of nature.

But the believer in the inspiration of the Bible is compelled to declare
that there was a time when slavery was right--when men could buy, and
women could sell, their babes. He is compelled to insist that there
was a time when polygamy was the highest form of virtue; when wars
of extermination were waged with the sword of mercy; when religious
toleration was a crime, and when death was the just penalty for having
expressed an honest thought. He must maintain that Jehovah is just as
bad now as he was four thousand years ago, or that he was just as
good then as he is now, but that human conditions have so changed that
slavery, polygamy, religious persecutions, and wars of conquest are now
perfectly devilish. Once they were right--once they were commanded by
God himself; now, they are prohibited. There has been such a change in
the conditions of man that, at the present time, the Devil is in favour
of slavery, polygamy, religious persecution, and wars of conquest. That
is to say, the Devil entertains the same opinion to-day that Jehovah
held four thousand years ago, but in the meantime Jehovah has remained
exactly the same--changeless and incapable of change.

We find that other nations beside the Jews had similar laws and ideas;
that they believed in and practised slavery and polygamy, murdered women
and children, and exterminated their neighbours to the extent of their
power. It is not claimed that they received a revelation. It is admitted
that they had no knowledge of the true God. And yet, by a strange
coincidence, they practised the same crimes, of their own motion, that
the Jews did by the command of Jehovah. From this it would seem that man
can do wrong without a special revelation. It will hardly be claimed,
at this day, that the passages in the Bible upholding slavery, polygamy,
war, and religious persecution are evidences of the inspiration of that
book. Suppose that there had been nothing in the Old Testament upholding
these crimes, would any modern Christian suspect that it was not
inspired, on account of the omission? Suppose that there had been
nothing in the Old Testament but laws in favour of these crimes, would
any intelligent Christian now contend that it was the work of the
true God? If the Devil had inspired a book, will some believer in the
doctrine of inspiration tell us in what respect, on the subjects of
slavery, polygamy, war, and liberty, it would have differed from some
parts of the Old Testament? Suppose that we should now discover a Hindu
book of equal antiquity with the Old Testament, containing a defence
of slavery, polygamy, wars of extermination, and religious persecution,
would we regard it as evidence that the writers were inspired by an
infinitely wise and merciful God? As most other nations at that time
practised these crimes, and as the Jews would have practised them all,
even if left to themselves, one can hardly see the necessity of any
inspired commands upon these subjects. Is there a believer in the Bible
who does not wish that God, amid the thunders and lightnings of Sinai,
had distinctly said to Moses that man should not own his fellow-man;
that women should not sell their babes; that men should be allowed to
think and investigate for themselves, and that the sword should never be
unsheathed to shed the blood of honest men? Is there a believer in
the world, who would not be delighted to find that every one of these
infamous passages are interpolations, and that the skirts of God
were never reddened by the blood of maiden, wife, or babe? Is there a
believer who does not regret that God commanded a husband to stone his
wife to death for suggesting the worship of the sun or moon? Surely,
the light of experience is enough to tell us that slavery is wrong, that
polygamy is infamous, and that murder is not a virtue. No one will now
contend that it was worth God's while to impart the information to Moses
or to Joshua, or to anybody else, that the Jewish people might purchase
slaves of the heathen, or that it was their duty to exterminate the
natives of the Holy Land. The deists have contended that the Old
Testament is too cruel and barbarous to be the work of a wise and loving
God, To this, the theologians have replied, that nature is just as
cruel; that the earthquake, the volcano, the pestilence and storm,
are just as savage as the Jewish God; and to my mind this is a perfect
answer.

Suppose that we knew that after "inspired" men had finished the Bible,
the Devil got possession of it, and wrote a few passages; what part of
the sacred Scriptures would Chris-tians now pick out as being probably
his work? Which of the following passages would naturally be selected as
having been written by the Devil--"Love thy neighbour as thyself," or,
"Kill all the males among the little ones, and kill every woman; but all
the women children keep alive for yourselves"?

It may be that the best way to illustrate what I have said of the Old
Testament is to compare some of the supposed teachings of Jehovah with
those of persons who never read an "inspired" line, and who lived and
died without having received the light of revelation. Nothing can be
more suggestive than a comparison of the ideas of Jehovah--the inspired
words of the one claimed to be the infinite God, as recorded in the
Bible--with those that have been expressed by men who, all admit,
received no help from heaven.

In all ages of which any record has been preserved, there have been
those who gave their ideas of justice, charity, liberty, love, and
law. Now, if the Bible is really the work of God, it should contain the
grandest and sublimest truths. It should, in all respects, excel the
works of man. Within that book should be found the best and loftiest
definitions of justice; the truest conceptions of human liberty; the
clearest outlines of duty; the tenderest, the highest, and the noblest
thoughts,--not that the human mind has produced, but that the human mind
is capable of receiving. Upon every page should be found the luminous
evidence of its divine origin. Unless it contains grander and more
wonderful things than man has written, we are not only justified in
saying, but we are compelled to say, that it was written by no being
superior to man. It may be said that it is unfair to call attention
to certain bad things in the Bible, while the good are not so much as
mentioned. To this it may be replied that a divine being would not put
bad things in a book. Certainly a being of infinite intelligence,
power, and goodness could never fall below the ideal of "depraved and
barbarous" man. It will not do, after we find that the Bible upholds
what we now call crimes, to say that it is not verbally inspired. If the
words are not inspired, what is? It may be said that the thoughts are
inspired. But this would include only the thoughts expressed without
words If ideas are inspired they must be contained in and expressed only
by inspired words; that is, to say, the arrangement of the words, with
relation, to each other, must have been inspired For the purpose of
this perfect; arrangement, the writers, according to the Christian
world, were inspired. Were some sculptor inspired, of God to make a
statue perfect in its every part, we would not say that the marble was
inspired, but the statue--the relation of part to part, the married;
harmony of form and function. The language, the words, take the place
of the marble, and it is the arrangement of these words that Christians
claim to be inspired. If there is one uninspired word,--that is, one
word in the wrong place, or a word that ought not to be there,--to that
extent the Bible is an uninspired book. The moment it is admitted that
some words are not, in their arrangement as to other words, inspired,
then, unless with absolute certainty these words can be pointed out, a
doubt is cast on all the words the book contains. If it was worth God's
while to make a revelation to man at all, it was certainly worth his
while to see to it that it was correctly made. He would not have allowed
the ideas and mistakes of pretended prophets and designing priests to
become so mingled with the original text that it is impossible to tell
where he ceased and where the priests and prophets began. Neither
will it do to say that God adapted his revelation to the prejudices of
mankind. Of course it was necessary for an infinite being to adapt
his revelation to the intellectual capacity of man; but why should God
confirm a barbarian in his prejudices? Why should he fortify a heathen
in his crimes? If a revelation is of any importance whatever, it is
to eradicate prejudices from the human mind. It should be a lever
with which to raise the human race. Theologians have exhausted their
ingenuity in finding excuses for God. It seems to me that they would be
better employed in finding excuses for men. They tell us that the Jews
were so cruel and ignorant that God was compelled to justify, or nearly
to justify, many of their crimes, in order to have any influence with
them whatever. They tell us that if he had declared slavery and
polygamy to be criminal, the Jews would have refused to receive the ten
commandments. They insist that, under the circumstances, God did the
best he could; that his real intention was to lead them along slowly,
step by step, so that, in a few hundred years, they would be induced to
admit that it was hardly fair to steal a babe from its mother's breast.
It has always seemed reasonable that an infinite God ought to have
been able to make man grand enough to know, even without a Special
revelation, that it is not altogether right to steal the labour, or the
wife, or the child, of another. When the whole question is thoroughly
examined, the world will find that Jehovah had the prejudices, the
hatreds and the superstitions of his day.

If there is anything of value, it is liberty. Liberty is the air of the
soul, the sunshine of life, Without it the world is a prison and the
universe an infinite dungeon.

If the Bible is really inspired Jehovah commanded the Jewish people to
buy the children of the strangers that sojourned among them, and ordered
that the children thus bought should be an inheritance for the children
of the Jews, and that they should be bondmen and bondwomen forever. Yet
Epictetus, a man to whom no revelation was ever made, a man whose soul
followed only the light of nature, and who had never heard of the Jewish
God, was great enough to say: "Will you not remember that your servants
are by nature your brothers, the children of God? In saying that you
have bought them, you look down on the earth, and into the pit, on the
wretched law of men long since dead, but you see not the laws of the
gods."

We find that Jehovah, speaking to his chosen people, assured them that
their bondmen and their bondmaids must be "of the heathen that were
round about them." "Of them," said Jehovah, "shall ye buy bondman
and bondmaid." And yet Cicero, a pagan, Cicero, who had never been
enlightened by reading the Old Testament, had the moral grandeur to
declare: "They who say that we should love our fellow-citizens, but not
foreigners, destroy the universal brotherhood of mankind, with which
benevolence and justice would perish forever."

If the Bible is inspired, Jehovah God of all worlds, actually said: "And
if a man smite his servant or his maid with a rod, and he die-under his
hand, he shall be surely punished; notwithstanding, if he continue a day
or two, he shall not be punished, for he is his money." And yet Zeno,
founder of the Stoics, centuries before Christ was born, insisted
that no man could be the owner of another, and that the title was bad,
whether the slave had become so by conquest, or by purchase. Jehovah
ordered a Jewish general to make war, and gave, among others, this
command: "When the Lord thy God shall drive them before thee, thou shalt
smite them and utterly destroy them; thou shalt make no covenant with
them, nor show mercy unto them." And yet Epictetus whom we have already
quoted, gave this marvellous rule for the guidance of human conduct:
"Live with thy inferiors as thou wouldst have thy superiors live with
thee."

Is it possible, after all, that a being of infinite goodness and wisdom
said: "I will heap mischief upon them; I will send my arrows upon them;
they shall be burned with hunger, and devoured with burning heat, and
with bitter destruction. I will send the tooth of beasts among them,
with the poison of serpents of the dust. The sword without, and terror
within, shall destroy both the young man and the virgin, the suckling,
also, with the man of grey hairs;" while Seneca, an uninspired Roman,
said: "The wise man will not pardon any crime that ought to be
punished, but he will accomplish, in a nobler way, all that is sought
in pardoning. He will spare some and watch over some, because of their
youth, and others on account of their ignorance. His clemency will not
fall short of justice, but will fulfil it perfectly."

Can we believe that God ever said of any one: "Let his children be
fatherless and his wife a widow; let his children be continually
vagabonds, and beg; let them seek their bread also out of their desolate
places; let the extortioner catch all that he hath and let the stranger
spoil his labour; let there be none to extend mercy unto him, neither
let there be any to favour his fatherless children." If he ever said
these words, surely he had never heard this line, this strain of music,
from the Hindu: "Sweet is the lute to those who have not heard the
prattle of their own children."

Jehovah, "from the clouds and darkness of Sinai" said to the Jews: "Thou
shalt have no other gods before me.... Thou shalt not bow down thyself
to them nor serve them; for I, the Lord thy God, am a jealous God,
visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon the children, unto the third
and fourth generation of them that hate me." Contrast these with the
words put by the Hindu in the mouth of Brahma: "I am the same to all
mankind. They who honestly serve other gods, involuntarily worship me.
I am he who partaketh of all worship, and I am the reward of all
worshippers."

Compare these passages. The first, a dungeon where crawl the things
begot of jealous slime; the other, great as the domed firmament inlaid
with suns.




II.

WAIVING the contradictory statements in the various books of the New
Testament; leaving out of the question the history of the manuscripts;
saying nothing about the errors in translation and the interpolations
made by the fathers; and admitting, for the time being, that the books
were all written at the times claimed, and by the persons whose names
they bear, the questions of inspiration, probability, and absurdity
still remain.

As a rule, where several persons testify to the same transaction, while
agreeing in the main points, they will disagree upon many minor things,
and such disagreement upon minor matters is generally considered as
evidence that the witnesses have not agreed among themselves upon the
story they should tell. These differences in statement we account for
from the facts that all did not see alike, that all did not have the
same opportunity for seeing, and that all had not equally good memories.
But when we claim that the witnesses were inspired, we must admit that
he who inspired them did know exactly what occurred, and consequently
there should be no contradiction, even in the minutest detail. The
accounts should be not only substantially, but they should be actually,
the same. It is impossible to account for any differences, or any
contradictions, except from the weaknesses of human nature, and these
weaknesses cannot be predicated of divine wisdom. Why should there
be more than one correct account of anything? Why were four gospels
necessary? One inspired record of all that happened ought to be enough.

One great objection to the Old Testament is the cruelty said to have
been commanded by God, but all the cruelties recounted in the Old
Testament ceased with death. The vengeance of Jehovah stopped at the
portal of the tomb. He never threatened to avenge himself upon the dead;
and not one word, from the first mistake in Genesis to the last curse
of Malachi, contains the slightest intimation that God will punish in
another world. It was reserved for the New Testament to make known the
frightful doctrine of eternal pain. It was the teacher of universal
benevolence who rent the veil between time and eternity, and fixed the
horrified gaze of man on the lurid gulfs of hell. Within the breast of
non-resistance was coiled the worm that never dies.

One great objection to the New Testament is that it bases salvation upon
belief. This, at least, is true of the Gospel according to John, and of
many of the epistles. I admit that Matthew never heard of the Atonement,
and died utterly ignorant of the scheme of salvation. I also admit that
Mark never dreamed that it was necessary for a man to be born again;
that he knew nothing of the mysterious doctrine of Regeneration, and
that he never even suspected that it was necessary to believe anything.
In the sixteenth chapter of Mark, we are told that "He that believeth
and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believeth not shall be
damned"; but this passage has been shown to be an interpolation, and,
consequently, not a solitary word is found in the Gospel according to
Mark upon the subject of salvation by faith. The same is also true
of the Gospel of Luke. It says not one word as to the necessity of
believing on Jesus Christy not one word as to the Atonement, not one
word upon the scheme of salvation, and not the slightest hint that it is
necessary to believe anything here in order to be happy hereafter.

And I here take occasion to say, that with most of the teachings of the
Gospels of Matthew, Mark, and Luke I most heartily agree. The miraculous
parts must, of course, be thrown aside. I admit that the necessity of
Belief, the Atonement, and the scheme of salvation are all set forth
in the Gospel of John,--a Gospel, in my opinion, not written until long
after the others.

According to the prevailing Christian belief, the Christian religion
rests upon the doctrine of the Atonement. If this doctrine is without
foundation, if it is repugnant to justice and mercy, the fabric falls.
We are told that the first man committed a crime for which all his
posterity are responsible,--in other words, that we are accountable,
and can be justly punished for a sin we never in fact committed. This
absurdity was the father of another, namely, that a man can be rewarded
for a good action done by another. God, according to the modern
theologians, made a law, with the penalty of eternal death for its
infraction. All men, they say, have broken that law. In the economy of
heaven, this law had to be vindicated. This could be done by damning the
whole human race. Through what is known as the Atonement, the salvation
of a few was made possible. They insist that the law--whatever that
is--demanded the extreme penalty, that justice called for its victims,
and that even mercy ceased to plead. Under these circumstances God, by
allowing the innocent to suffer, satisfactorily settled with the law,
and allowed a few of the guilty to escape. The law was satisfied with
this arrangement. To carry out this scheme, God was born as a babe into
this world. "He grew in stature and increased in knowledge." At the
age of thirty-three, after having lived a life filled with kindness,
charity, and nobility, after having practised every virtue, he was
sacrificed as an atonement for man. It is claimed that he actually took
our place, and bore our sins and our guilt; that in this way the justice
of God was satisfied, and that the blood of Christ was an atonement, an
expiation, for the sins of all who might believe on him.

Under the Mosaic dispensation, there was no remission of sin except
through the shedding of blood. If a man committed certain sins, he
must bring to the priest a lamb, a bullock, a goat, or a pair of
turtle-doves. The priest would lay his hands upon the animal, and the
sin of the man would be transferred. Then the animal would be killed in
the place of the real sinner, and the blood thus shed and sprinkled upon
the altar would be an atonement. In this way Jehovah was satisfied.
The greater the crime, the greater the sacrifice--the more blood, the
greater the atonement. There was always a certain ratio between the
value of the animal and the enormity of the sin. The most minute
directions were given about the killing of these animals, and about
the sprinkling of their blood. Every priest became a butcher, and every
sanctuary a slaughter-house. Nothing could be more utterly shocking to
a refined and loving soul. Nothing could have been better calculated to
harden the heart than this continual shedding of innocent blood. This
terrible system is supposed to have culminated in the sacrifice of
Christ. His blood took the place of all other. It is necessary to shed
no more. The law at last is satisfied, satiated, surfeited. The idea
that God wants blood is at the bottom of the Atonement, and rests
upon the most fearful savagery. How can sin be transferred from men to
animals, and how can the shedding of the blood of animals atone for the
sins of men?

The Church says that the sinner is in debt to God, and that the
obligation is discharged by the Saviour. The best that can possibly be
said of such a transaction is, that the debt is transferred, not paid.
The truth is, that a sinner is in debt to the person he has injured.
If a man injures his neighbour, it is not enough for him to get the
forgiveness of God, but he must have the forgiveness of his neighbour.
If a man puts his hand in the fire and God forgives him, his hand will
smart exactly the same. You must, after all, reap what you sow. No god
can give you wheat when you sow tares, and no devil can give you tares
when you sow wheat.

There are in nature neither rewards nor punishments--there are
consequences. The life of Christ is worth its example, its moral force,
its heroism of benevolence.

To make innocence suffer is the greatest sin; how then is it possible to
make the suffering of the innocent a justification for the criminal? Why
should a man be willing to let the innocent suffer for him? Does not
the willingness show that he is utterly unworthy of the sacrifice?
Certainly, no man would be fit for heaven who would consent that an
innocent person should suffer for his sin. What would we think of a
man who would allow another to die for a crime that he himself had
committed? What would we think of a law that allowed the innocent to
take the place of the guilty? Is it possible to vindicate a just law
by inflicting punishment on the innocent? Would not that be a second
violation instead of a vindication?

If there was no general Atonement until the crucifixion of Christ, what
became of the countless millions who died before that time? And it must
be remembered that the blood shed by the Jews was not for other nations.
Jehovah hated foreigners. The Gentiles were left without forgiveness.
What has become of the millions who have died since, without having
heard of the Atonement? What becomes of those who have heard but have
not believed? It seems to me that the doctrine of the Atonement is
absurd, unjust, and immoral. Can a law be satisfied by the execution
of the wrong person? When a man commits a crime, the laws demands his
punishment, not that of a substitute; and there can be no law, human
or divine, that can be satisfied by the punishment of a substitute. Can
there be a Jaw that demands that the guilty be rewarded? And yet, to
reward the guilty is far nearer justice than to punish the innocent.

According to the orthodox theology, there would have been no heaven had
no Atonement been made. All the children of men would have been cast
into hell forever. The old men bowed with grief, the smiling mothers,
the sweet babes, the loving maidens, the brave, the tender, and the
just, would have been given over to eternal pain. Man, it is claimed,
can make no Atonement for himself. If he commits one sin, and with
that exception lives a life of perfect virtue, still that one sin would
remain unexpiated, unatoned, and for that one sin he would be forever
lost To be saved by the goodness of another, to be a redeemed debtor
forever, has in it something repugnant to manhood.

We must also remember that Jehovah took special charge of the Jewish
people; and we have always been taught that he did so for the purpose
of civilizing them. If he had succeeded in civilizing the Jews, he would
have made the damnation of the entire human race a certainty; because,
if the Jews had been a civilized people when Christ appeared,--a
people whose hearts had not been hardened by the laws and teachings of
Jehovah,--they would not have crucified him, and, as a consequence,
the world would have been lost. If the Jews had believed in religious
freedom,--in the right of thought and speech,--not a human soul could
ever have been saved. If, when Christ was on his way to Calvary\ some
brave, heroic soul had rescued him from the holy mob, he would not
only have been eternally damned for his pains, but would have rendered
impossible the salvation of any human being; and, except for the
crucifixion of her son, the Virgin Mary, if the church is right, would
be to-day among the lost.

In countless ways the Christian world has endeavoured, for nearly two
thousand years, to explain the Atonement, and every effort has ended
in an admission that it cannot be understood, and a declaration that it
must be believed. Is it not immoral to teach that man can sin, that he
can harden his heart and pollute his soul, and that, by repenting
and believing something that he does not comprehend, he can avoid the
consequences of his crimes? Has the promise and hope of forgiveness ever
prevented the commission of a sin? Should men be taught that sin gives
happiness here; that they ought to bear the evils of a virtuous life in
this world for the sake of joy in the next; that they can repent between
the last sin and the last breath; that after repentance every stain
of the soul is washed away by the innocent blood of another; that the
serpent of regret: will not hiss in the ear of memory; that the saved
will not even pity the victims of their own crimes; that the goodness
of another can be transferred to them; and that sins forgiven cease to
affect the unhappy wretches sinned against?

Another objection is that a certain belief is necessary to save the soul
It is often asserted that to believe is the only safe way. If you wish
to be safe, be honest. Nothing can be safer than that. No matter what
his belief may be, no man, even in the hour of death, can regret having
been honest. It never can be necessary to throw away your reason to save
your soul. A soul without reason is scarcely worth saving. There is no
more degrading doctrine than that of mental non-resistance. The soul has
a right to defend its castle--the brain, and he who waives that right
becomes a serf and slave. Neither can I admit that a man, by doing me
an injury, can place me under obligation to do him a service. To render
benefits for injuries is to ignore all distinctions between actions. He
who treats his friends and enemies alike has neither love nor justice.
The idea of non-resistance never occurred to a man with power to protect
himself. This doctrine was the child of weakness, born when resistance
was impossible. To allow a crime to be committed when you can prevent
it, is next to committing the crime yourself. And yet, under the banner
of non-resistance, the Church has shed the blood of millions, and in the
folds of her sacred Vestments have gleamed the daggers of assassination.
With her cunning hands she wove the purple for hypocrisy, and placed
the crown upon the brow of crime. For a thousand years larceny held the
scales of justice, while beggars scorned the princely sons of toil, and
ignorant fear denounced the liberty of thought.

If Christ was in fact God, he knew all the future. Before him, like a
panorama, moved the history yet to be. He knew exactly how his words
would be interpreted. He knew what crimes, what horrors, what infamies
would be committed in his name. He knew that the fires of persecution
would climb around the limbs of countless martyrs. He knew that brave
men would languish in dungeons, in darkness, filled with pain; that the
Church would use instruments of torture, that his followers would appeal
to whip and chain. He must have seen the horizon of the future red with
the flames of the Auto-da-Fe. He knew all the creeds that would spring
like poison fungi from every text. He saw the sects waging war against
each other. He saw thousands of men, under the orders of priests,
building dungeons for their fellow-men. He saw them using instruments
of pain. He heard the groans, saw the faces white with agony, the tears,
the blood--heard the shrieks and sobs of all the moaning, martyred
multitudes. He knew that commentaries would be written on his words
with swords, to be read by the light of fagots. He knew that the
_Inquisition_ would be born of teachings attributed to him. He saw all
the interpolations and falsehoods that hypocrisy would write and
tell. He knew that above these fields of death, these dungeons, these
burnings, for a thousand years would float the dripping banner of the
cross. He knew that in his name his followers would trade in human
flesh, that cradles would be robbed, and women's breasts unbabed for
gold, and yet he died with voiceless lips. Why did he fail to speak?
Why did he not tell his disciples, and through them the world, that man
should not persecute, for opinion's sake, his fellow-man? Why did he not
cry, You shall not persecute in my name; you shall not burn and torment
those who differ from you in creed? Why did he not plainly say, I am the
Son of God? Why did he not explain the doctrine of the Trinity? Why did
he not tell the manner of baptism that was pleasing to him? Why did he
not say something positive, definite, and satisfactory about another
world? Why did he not turn the tear-stained hope of heaven to the glad
knowledge of another life? Why did he go dumbly to his death, leaving
the world to misery and to doubt?

He came, they tell us, to make a revelation, and what did he reveal?
"Love thy neighbour as thyself"? That was in the Old Testament, "Love
God with all thy heart"? That was in the Old Testament, "Return good
for evil "? That was said by _Buddha_ seven hundred years before he was
born, "Do unto others as ye would that they should do unto you"? This
was the doctrine of _Laotse_. Did he come to give a rule of action?
_Zoroaster_ had done this, long before: "Whenever thou art in doubt as
to whether an action is good or bad, abstain from it." Did he come to
teach us of another world? The immortality of the soul had been taught
by _Hindus, Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans_ hundreds of years before he
was born. Long before, the world had been told by _Socrates_ that: "One
who is injured ought not to return the injury, for on no account can it
be right to do an injustice; and it is not right to return an injury, or
to do evil to any man, however much we may have suffered from him." And
_Cicero_ had said: "Let us not listen to those who think that we ought
to be angry with our enemies and who believe this to be great and manly:
nothing is more praiseworthy, nothing so clearly shows a great and noble
soul, as clemency and readiness to forgive."

Is there anything nearer perfect than this from _Confucius_: "For
benefits return benefits; for injuries return justice without any
admixture of revenge"?

The dogma of eternal punishment rests upon passages in the _New
Testament_, This infamous belief subverts every idea of justice. Around
the angel of immortality the Church has coiled this serpent. A finite
being can neither commit an infinite sin, nor a sin against the
infinite. A being of infinite goodness and wisdom has no right,
according to the human standard of justice, to create any being destined
to suffer eternal pain. A being of infinite wisdom would not create
a failure, and surely a man destined to everlasting agony is not a
success.

How long, according to the universal benevolence of the New Testament,
can a man be reasonably punished in the next world for failing to
believe something unreasonable in this? Can it be possible that any
punishment can endure forever? Suppose that every flake of snow that
ever fell was a figure nine, and that the first flake was multiplied by
the second, and that product by the third, and so on to the last flake.
And then suppose that this total should be multiplied by every drop of
rain that ever fell, calling each drop a figure nine; and that total by
each blade of grass that ever helped to weave a carpet for the earth,
calling each blade a figure nine, and that again by every grain of sand
on every shore, so that the grand total would make a line of nines so
long that it would require millions upon millions of years for light,
travelling at the rate of one hundred and eighty-five thousand miles per
second, to reach the end. And suppose, further, that each unit in this
almost infinite total stood for billions of ages--still that vast and
almost endless time, measured by all the years beyond, is as one flake,
one drop, one leaf, one blade, one grain, compared with all the flakes,
and drops, and leaves, and blades, and grains.

Upon love's breast the Church has placed the eternal asp. And yet, in
the same book in which is taught this most infamous of doctrines, we are
assured that "The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over
all his works."

SO FAR as we know, man is the author of all books. If a book had been
found on the earth by the first man, he might have regarded it as the
work of God; but as men were here a good while before any books were
found, and as man has produced a great many books, the probability is
that the Bible is no exception.

Most nations, at the time the Old Testament was written, believed in
slavery, polygamy, wars of extermination, and religious persecution;
and it is not wonderful that the book contained nothing contrary to such
belief. The fact that it was in exact accord with the morality of its
time proves that it was not the product of any being superior to man.
"The inspired writers" upheld or established slavery, countenanced
polygamy, commanded wars of extermination, and ordered the slaughter
of women and babes. In these respects they were precisely like the
uninspired savages by whom they were surrounded. They also taught and
commanded religious persecution as a duty, and visited the most trivial
offences with the punishment of death. In these particulars they were in
exact accord with their barbarian neighbours. They were utterly ignorant
of geology and astronomy, and knew no more of what had happened than of
what would happen; and, so far as accuracy is concerned, their history
and prophecy were about equal; in other words, they were just as
ignorant as those who lived and died in Nature's night.

Does any Christian believe that if God were to write a book now, he
would uphold the crimes commanded in the Old Testament? Has, Jehovah
improved? Has infinite mercy become more merciful? Has infinite wisdom
intellectually advanced? Will any one claim that the passages upholding
slavery have liberated mankind; that we are indebted for our modern
homes to the texts that made polygamy a virtue; or that religious
liberty found its soil, its light, and rain, in the infamous verse
wherein the husband is commanded to stone to death the wife for
worshipping an unknown God?

The usual answer to these objection is that no country has ever been
civilized without the Bible.

The Jews were the only people to whom Jehovah made his will directly
known,--the only people who had the Old Testament. Other nations were
utterly neglected by their Creator. Yet, such was the effect of the Old
Testament on the Jews, that they crucified a kind, loving, and perfectly
innocent man. They could not have done much worse without a Bible. In
the crucifixion of Christ, they followed the teachings of his Father.
If, as it is now alleged by the theologians, no nation can be civilized
without a Bible, certainly God must have known the fact six thousand
years ago, as well as the theologians know it now. Why did he not
furnish every nation with a Bible?

As to the Old Testament, I insist that all the bad passages were written
by men; that those passages were not inspired. I insist that a being of
infinite goodness never commanded man to enslave his fellow-man, never
told a mother to sell her babe, never established polygamy, never
ordered one nation to exterminate another, and never told a husband to
kill his wife because she suggested the worshipping of some other God.

I also insist that the Old Testament would be a much better book with
all of these passages left out; and, whatever may be said of the rest,
the passages to which attention has been drawn can with vastly more
propriety be attributed to a Devil than to a God.

Take from the New Testament all passages upholding the idea that belief
is necessary to salvation; that Christ was offered as an atonement for
the sins of the world; that the punishment of the human soul will go
on forever; that heaven is the reward of faith, and hell the penalty of
honest investigation; take from it all miraculous stories,--and I admit
that all the good passages are true. If they are true, it makes no
difference whether they are Inspired or not. Inspiration is only
necessary to give authority to that which is repugnant to human reason.

Only that which never happened needs to be substantiated by miracles.
The universe is natural.

The Church must cease to insist that the passages upholding the
institutions of savage men were inspired of God, The dogma of the
Atonement must be abandoned. Good deeds must take the place of faith.
The savagery of eternal punishment must be renounced. Credulity is not
a virtue, and investigation is not a crime. Miracles are the children
of mendacity. Nothing can be more wonderful than the majestic, unbroken,
sublime, and eternal procession of causes and effects.

Reason must be the final arbiter, "Inspired" books attested by miracles
cannot stand against a demonstrated fact. A religion that does not
command the respect of the greatest minds will, in a little while,
excite the mockery of all. Every civilized man believes in the liberty
of thought. Is it possible that God is intolerant? Is an act infamous in
man one of the virtues of the Deity? Could there be progress in heaven
without intellectual liberty? Is the freedom of the future to exist only
in perdition? Is it not, after all, barely possible that a man acting
like Christ can be saved? Is a man to be eternally rewarded for
believing according to evidence, with out evidence, or against evidence?
Are we to be saved because we are good, or because another was virtuous?
Is credulity to be winged and crowned, while honest doubt is chained ana
damned?

Do not misunderstand me. My position is that the cruel passages in
the Old Testament are not inspired; that slavery, polygamy, wars of
extermination, and religious persecution, always have been, are, and
forever will be, abhorred and cursed by the honest, the virtuous, and
the loving; that the innocent cannot justly suffer for the guilty,
and that vicarious vice and vicarious virtue are equally absurd; that
eternal punishment is eternal revenge; that only the natural can happen;
that miracles prove the dishonesty of the few and the credulity of the
many; and that, according to Matthew, Mark, and Luke, salvation does not
depend upon belief, nor the Atonement, nor a "second birth," but that
these gospel are in exact harmony with the declaration of the great
Persian: "Taking the first footstep with the good thought, the second
with the good word, and the third with the good deed, I entered
paradise."

The dogmas of the past no longer reach the level of the highest thought,
nor satisfy the hunger of the heart. While dusty faiths, embalmed and
sepulchered in ancient texts, remain the same, the sympathies of men
enlarge; the brain no longer kills its young; the happy lips give
liberty to honest thoughts; the mental firmament expands and lifts; the
broken clouds drift by; the hideous dreams, the foul, misshapen children
of the monstrous night, dissolve and fade.







End of Project Gutenberg's The Christian Religion, by Robert G. Ingersoll



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION: AN ENQUIRY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The House That Jill Built, after Jack's Had Proved a Failure
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The House That Jill Built, after Jack's Had Proved a Failure

Author: E. C. Gardner


        
Release date: April 30, 2005 [eBook #15678]
                Most recently updated: December 14, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/15678

Credits: Produced by Audrey Longhurst, Jeannie Howse and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading (https://www.pgdp.net), from images
        generously provided by the Hearth Library, Cornell
        University (http://hearth.library.cornell.edu/).


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOUSE THAT JILL BUILT, AFTER JACK'S HAD PROVED A FAILURE ***




Produced by Audrey Longhurst, Jeannie Howse and the Online
Distributed Proofreading (https://www.pgdp.net), from images
generously provided by the Hearth Library, Cornell
University (http://hearth.library.cornell.edu/).










     THE HOUSE THAT JILL BUILT,
     AFTER JACK'S HAD PROVED A FAILURE.


     A BOOK ON
     HOME ARCHITECTURE,
     WITH ILLUSTRATIONS,

     BY E.C. GARDNER,

     _Author of "Homes and How to Make Them." "Home Interiors,"
     "Common Sense in Church Building," etc._


     SPRINGFIELD, MASS.:
     W.F. ADAMS COMPANY,
     1896.




     1882,
     BY OUR CONTINENT PUBLISHING Co.
     _All rights reserved._
     E.C. GARDNER, 1895.



     Printed and Bound by
     CLARK W. BRYAN COMPANY,
     Springfield, Mass.




CONTENTS.

                                                             PAGE

CHAPTER I.
A WISE FATHER AND A GLAD SON-IN-LAW                             7

CHAPTER II.
MORAL SUASION FOR MALARIAL MARSHES                             20

CHAPTER III.
A FIRST VISIT AND SAGE ADVICE                                  32

CHAPTER IV.
MANY FIRES MAKE SMALL DIVIDENDS                                48

CHAPTER V.
WHEN THE FLOODS BEAT AND THE RAINS DESCEND                     63

CHAPTER VI.
THE WISDOM OF JILL IN THE KITCHEN                              78

CHAPTER VII
BE HONEST AND KEEP WARM                                        90

CHAPTER VIII
TRUTH, POETRY AND ROOFS                                       103

CHAPTER IX.
PROFESSIONAL ETIQUETTE--BLINDS AND BESSIE                     115

CHAPTER X.
MORE QUESTIONS OF FIRE AND WATER                              128

CHAPTER XI.
WHAT SHALL WE STAND UPON?                                     140

CHAPTER XII.
FROM MATHEMATICS TO ANCIENT BRIC-A-BRAC                       151

CHAPTER XIII.
ECONOMY, CLEANLINESS, AND HEALTH                              166

CHAPTER XIV.
SAFE FLUES AND MORE LIGHT                                     177

CHAPTER XV.
A DANGEROUS RIVAL                                             189

CHAPTER XVI.
A NEW WAY OF GETTING UP STAIRS AND A NEW MISSIONARY FIELD     203

CHAPTER XVII.
THE RIGHT SIDE OF PAINT, A PROTEST AND A PROMISE              221

CHAPTER XVIII.
THE HOUSE FINISHED AND THE HOME BEGUN                         233

CHAPTER XIX.
TEN YEARS AFTER                                               250

CHAPTER XX.
A DOUBLE CONCLUSION                                           258




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

_From Drawings by the Author_.

                                                             PAGE

1. "COUSIN GEORGE'S EXTERIOR"                                  11

2. COUSIN GEORGE'S FIRST FLOOR                                 14

3. COUSIN GEORGE'S SECOND FLOOR                                15

4. "WARMTH IS BEAUTY"                                          21

5. A HIDDEN FOE                                                23

6. A BURIED GRIDIRON                                           24

7. THE PROTECTING "CUT-OFF"                                    25

8. A "CROSS-SECTION" PROPHECY                                  28

9. HEAT FROM ALL SIDES                                         30

10. AUNT MELVILLE'S AMBITION                                   33

11. NO PLACE FOR THE BED                                       36

12. ENLARGED BY DESTRUCTION                                    37

13. A SLIGHT ADDITION                                          39

14. GROUND FLOOR OF AUNT MELVILLE'S AMBITION                   42

15. FIRST FLOOR OF AUNT MELVILLE'S AMBITION                    43

16. A SECURE OUTLOOK                                           49

17. MINED AND COUNTERMINED                                     52

18. A DORMER OF BURNED CLAY                                    55

19. THE TOPMOST PEAK                                           59

20. WILL'S MASTERPIECE                                         65

21. THE FIRST FLOOR OF WILL'S MASTERPIECE                      73

22. THE SECOND FLOOR OF WILL'S MASTERPIECE                     75

23. THE OUTSIDE OF TED'S HOUSE                                 79

24. JILL'S KITCHEN IN BLACK AND WHITE                          83

25. THE FIRST FLOOR OF TED'S HOUSE                             88

26. THE POOR BUT MODEST ATTORNEY'S COTTAGE                     91

27. A DOUBLE TEAM                                              94

28. WARMTH UNDER THE WINDOW                                    96

29. STEAM PIPES BESIDE THE FIREPLACE                           97

30. THE ATTORNEY'S FLOOR PLAN                                 101

31. NO CONCEALMENT OR DISGUISE                                105

32. WITH A MULLION AND WITHOUT                                110

33. JACK'S ARCHITECTURAL PHRENOLOGY                           112

34. THE HAT MAKES THE MAN                                     113

35. THE CONTRIBUTION OF BESSIE'S FATHER                       117

36. THE FIRST FLOOR OF THE CONTRIBUTION                       123

37. A GARGOYLE                                                130

38. A CHOICE OF GUTTERS                                       131

39. A SIMPLE RECESS                                           133

40. IN THE MIDDLE RANK                                        135

41. THE WORTH OF A COSY COTTAGE                               137

42. A PROMISE OF SOCIAL SUCCESS                               141

43. A REASONABLE HOPE                                         143

44. FLOORS AS THEY ARE: FLOORS AS THEY MIGHT BE               145

45. BRICKS AND BOULDERS ON GRANITE UNDERPINNING               149

46. NOT BRILLIANT, BUT IMPRESSIVE                             153

47. WOODEN RICHNESS                                           155

48. NO WASTE OF WOOD                                          156

49. FIRST FLOOR OF THE PROMISE                                158

50. SECOND FLOOR OF THE PROMISE                               159

51. NO PLACE FOR SECRET FOES                                  167

52. SAFE AND SAVING FLUES                                  179-80

53. A PICTURE IN GLASS OVER THE FIREPLACE                     181

54. GLASS OF MANY COLORS, SHAPES AND SIZES                    183

55. SHELVES IN THE MIDDLE, CUPBOARDS ABOVE AND BELOW          185

56. "THE OAKS"                                                191

57. OUTSIDE BARRIERS                                          195

58. INSIDE BARRIERS                                           196

59. COMMON UGLINESS--SIMPLE GRACE                             197

60. FIRST FLOOR PLAN OF "THE OAKS"                            201

61. LOOKING TOWARD SUNSET                                     205

62. NEAR THE TURNING-POINT                                    207

63. A CHOICE OF BALUSTERS                                     209

64. THE BIG FIREPLACE IN THE KEEPING-ROOM                     211

65. ONE WAY TO BEGIN                                          213

66. A BROADSIDE OF AN EASY ASCENT                             215

67. A DIVIDING SCREEN AT THE FOOT OF THE STAIRS               219

68. BITS OF CORNICES                                          223

69. MOULDINGS FAIR TO SEE, BUT HARD TO KEEP CLEAN             225

70. FRAGMENTS OF ARCHITRAVES                                  227

71. A CHOICE OF WAINSCOTS                                     229

72. WOOD PANELS FOR WALLS AND CEILINGS, WITH IRREGULARITIES
    IN LEATHER, PAINT AND PAPER                               231

73. THE HOUSE THAT JILL BUILT                                 235

74. THE FIRST FLOOR OF THE HOUSE THAT JILL BUILT              239

75. THE SECOND FLOOR OF THE HOUSE THAT JILL BUILT             241

76. THE EAST END OF JILL'S DINING-ROOM                        243

77. A CASTLE IN SPAIN                                         263

_Also Initials, Tail-Pieces, etc._




INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

                                    PAGE

BUILDING SITES                        16
BRICKS                        46, 53, 58
BLINDS                               116
CHIMNEYS                             179
CONTRACT WORK                        233
COMPETITIVE PLANS                    237
DOORS                                194
FIREPROOF CONSTRUCTION                54
FALSE CHIMNEY-PIECE                   98
FIREPLACES                           134
FLOORS                               140
FASHION                              224
GUTTERS                              129
HEATING                          97, 132
HEIGHT OF ROOMS                      138
HARD WOOD                            197
INTERIOR FINISH                      221
KITCHEN ARRANGEMENTS             81, 125
PLUMBING                        166, 177
PANTRIES                        186, 189
PAINT                                223
ROOFS                            69, 113
STAIRS                           38, 214
STAINED GLASS                    38, 183
TERRA COTTA                           61
UNDER-DRAINING                        24
VENTILATING FLUES                    178
WINDOWS                         110, 183
WOODEN BUILDINGS                      51




PREFACE

TO THE REVISED EDITION.


On a recent visit to the young woman whose experiences and observations
are contained in this book, I was greatly pleased to find her zeal and
interest in domestic architecture unabated. She sees that there have
been changes and improvements in the art of house building, but
declares that while some of her opinions and suggestions of ten years
ago have been approved and accepted, it is still true that by far the
greater number of those who plan and build houses are guided by
transient fashion, thoughtless conservatism and a silly seeking for
sensational results, rather than by truth, simplicity and common sense.

She has no doubt that her daughter, Bessie, will study and practice
domestic architecture, and naturally expects the houses of the future
to contain charms and comforts of which we have as yet only the
faintest conception.

                                               E.C. GARDNER.
_Springfield, Mass., November, 1895._




INTRODUCTION


"MR. E.C. Gardner, architect, has consented to write us a series of
articles upon house-building," said one of his associates to the editor
of OUR CONTINENT a few months since. "What do you think of it?"

"We have no sort of use for such a thing," replied the editor. "There
are treatises enough professing to instruct people how to build houses.
You can't make every man his own carpenter any more than you can make
him his own lawyer. More's the pity."

"But I thought you said you wanted some one who had sense enough to put
a thoroughly capable and accomplished housewife's notions of what a
house should be into readable prose?"

"So I did," responded the editor, "and I still want it, and am likely
to want it for a long time. I do not wish articles on _House_-building
but on _Home_-building, and you will never get such from an
architect."

"Don't be too sure of that," said the other, who had had a taste of the
writer's quality before. "Suppose he should wish to try it?"

"Well,--let him," was the grumbled assent.

The editor did not believe in architects. He had built one or two
houses that did well enough on paper, but were simply appalling in
their unfitness when he came to try to adapt the occupants to the
earthly tabernacles which had been erected for their use and
enjoyment. He had read house-building books, examined plans and
discoursed with architects until he verily believed that the whole
business was a snare and a delusion. After this experience he had
settled down to the serious belief that the best way to build a house
was to erect first a square building containing but one room, and then
add on rooms as the occupants learned their needs or the family
increased in numbers. In this way, he stoutly maintained, had been
erected all those old houses, whose irregularity of outline and
frequent surprises in interior arrangement never cease to charm. He
asserted boldly that a man's house ought to grow around him like an
oyster's-shell, and should fit him just as perfectly; in fact, that it
should be created, not built. From architects and their works he prayed
devoutly to be delivered, and having theretofore illustrated that part
of the proverb which avers that "fools build houses," he declared
himself determined thenceforth only to illustrate the latter-part of
the proverb:--"and wise men live in them."

Having, however, became sponsor in some sort for what Mr. Gardner might
write, he was bound to give attention to it. Very much to his surprise,
he found it instead of a thankless task, a most agreeable
entertainment. Seldom, indeed, have wit and wisdom been so happily
blended as in these pages. The narrative that runs through the whole
constitutes a silver thread of merriment on which the pearls of sense
are strung with lavish freedom. Every page is sure to contain the
subject-matter for a hearty laugh close-linked with a lesson that may
well be conned by the most serious-minded. The philosophy of
home-building and home-improving is expounded with a subtlety of humor
and an aptness of illustration as rare as they are relishable.

There are three classes of people to whom this little volume with its
quaint descriptions and wise suggestions will be peculiarly welcome.

    _First_--Those who contemplate, at some time, the building of a
    home. It matters not whether it is to be humble or palatial,
    "The House that Jill Built" will be found to contain not only
    the most valuable suggestions, but a humorous gaiety that will
    be sure to add pleasure to this duty.

    _Second_--Those who desire at any time to enlarge, modify or
    improve the homes in which they live; for they will find very
    forcibly illustrated in its pages the principles which should
    govern such modification.

    _Third_--Those who, like the writer hereof, have suffered in
    purse and comfort from the lack of such a pleasant and
    philosophical treatise, and who will be glad to see how their
    blunders might have been avoided.

"The House that Jill Built" is founded on the rock of common sense. It
does not profess to tell the prospective builder how to be his own
architect and carpenter; it does not fit him out with a plan ready made
and tested--by somebody else: but deftly and easily it leads him to
think about the essential elements of the home he desires until, almost
unconsciously, he finds himself prepared to give such directions to an
honest architect as will secure for his home, convenience, safety and
that peculiar fitness which is the chief element of beauty in domestic
architecture. It is not so much for what is taught as for what is
suggested that the book is valuable. What the author has written is
perhaps not more remarkable than the peculiar art with which he compels
the reader to think for himself. "The House that Jill Built" may fairly
be said to take the first place among the many works that are designed
to make our domestic architecture what it ought to be--the art by which
the house-builder may erect a home adapted to his needs, commensurate
with his means, in harmony with its surroundings and conducive to the
health and comfort of its occupants. What the author's pen has so well
described his pencil has illustrated with equal happiness.

In penance for the lack of faith displayed at the outset and in hearty
approval of the pages that follow, the Editor has written these words.

                                               A.W. TOURGÉE.
PHILADELPHIA, Oct., 1882.




THE HOUSE THAT JILL BUILT.




CHAPTER I.

A WISE FATHER AND A GLAD SON-IN-LAW.


Among the wedding-presents was a small white envelope containing two
smaller slips of paper. On one of these, which was folded around the
other, was written,

     "A NEW HOUSE, FROM FATHER."

The enclosed slip was a bank-check, duly stamped and endorsed. Did any
old wizard's magic-box ever hold greater promise in smaller compass!
Certainly not more than the bride saw in imagination as she read the
figures upon the crisp bit of tissue. Walls, roof and stately chimneys
arose in pleasant pictures before her mental vision. There were broad
windows taking in floods of sunshine; fireplaces that glowed with
living flames and never smoked; lazy lounging places and cosy corners
for busy work or quiet study; sleepy bed-rooms; a kitchen that made
housework the finest art and the surest science, and oh, such closets,
such stairways, such comforts! such defiance of the elements, such
security against cold and heat, against fire, flood and tempest! such
economy! such immunity from all the ills that domestic life is heir to,
from intractable servants to sewer-gas!

If some ardent esthete had arrested her flight of fancy by asking
whether she found room for soul-satisfying beauty, she would have
dropped from her air-castle, landing squarely upon her feet, and
replied that if her house was comfortable and told no lies it would be
beautiful enough for her--which was saying a great deal, however
interpreted, for she loved beauty, as all well-balanced mortals ought,
and she would have been conspicuously out of place in a house that was
not beautiful.

Perhaps I ought to explain that the house that Jack built, intending to
establish Jill as its mistress when it should be completed, had proved
most unsatisfactory to that extremely practical young woman. In
consequence, she had obstinately refused to name the happy day till the
poor, patient fellow had kept bachelor's hall nearly a year. At last,
in consideration of an unqualified permission to "make the house over"
to any extent, the rough place that threatened to upset them was made
smooth. Her father's present, wisely withheld till peace was declared,
left nothing to be desired, and they started on their wedding journey
as happy as if they owned the universe. This excursion, however, came
near being a failure from the sentimental standpoint, because, wherever
Jill discovered a house that gave any outward sign of inward grace, it
must be visited and examined as to its internal arrangements. Naturally
this struck Jack as an unromantic diversion, but he soon caught the
spirit, and after much practice gave his salutatory address with
apparent eagerness:

"My wife and I happen to be passing through town and have been struck
by the appearance of your house. Will you kindly allow us to have a
glimpse of the interior?"

The request was invariably granted, for nothing is more gratifying than
the fame of having the "finest house in town." Unhappily the interiors
were never satisfactory to Jill, and her valedictory to the owners of
the striking houses seldom went beyond thanks for their courtesy.

"We visited several houses on our trip," she observed to her father--

"Several hundred," said Jack--

"But were disappointed in them all. Many of them must have cost more
than ours will cost, but the money seemed to us foolishly spent."

"Yes," said her husband, "we concluded that the chief plank in the
platform of the architects and builders was 'Millions for display--not
one cent for comfort.'"

"Well, Jack, we have learned one thing on our travels--where _not_ to
look for the plans of our house."

A box of letters from her dear five hundred friends awaited Jill's
return, and a whole afternoon was devoted to them. Each letter
contained some allusion to the new house. At least ten conveyed
underscored advice of the most vital importance, which, if not
followed, would demoralize the servants, distress her husband and
ultimately destroy her domestic peace. Taken at a single dose, the
counsel was confusing, to say the least; but Jill read it faithfully,
laid it away for future reference, and gave the summary to her husband
somewhat as follows:

"It appears, Jack, my dear, to be absolutely indispensable to our
future happiness that the house shall front north, south, east and
west."

"Let's build it on a pivot."

"We must not have large halls to keep warm in cold weather, and we
_must_ have large halls 'for style.' The stories must not be less than
eleven nor more than nine feet high. It must be carpeted throughout and
all the floors must be bare. It must be warmed by steam and hot water
and furnaces and fireplaces and base-burners and coal grates."

"We shan't have to go away from home to get into purgatory, shall we?"

"Hush! The walls of the rooms must be calcimined, painted, frescoed and
papered; they must be dyed in the mortar, finished with leather, with
tiles, with tapestry and with solid wood panels. There must be
blinds--outside blinds, awnings, inside shutters, rolling blinds,
Venetian shades and no blinds at all. There must be wide, low-roofed
piazzas all around the house, so that we can live out of doors in the
summer, and on no account must the sun be excluded from the windows of
the first story by piazza roofs. At least eight patent sanitary
plumbing articles, and as many cooking ranges, are each the only one
safe and fit to be used. The house must be high and low--"

"I'm Jack and you shall be game--"

[Illustration: COUSIN GEORGE'S EXTERIOR.]

"It must be of bricks, wood and stone, separately and in combination;
it must be Queen Anne, Gothic, French, Japanesque and classic American,
and it must be painted all the colors of an autumn landscape."

"Well, there's one comfort," said Jack; "you haven't paid for this
advice, so you won't be obliged to take it in order to save it."

"I should think not, indeed, but that isn't the trouble. These letters
are from my special friends, wise, practical people, who know
everything about building and housekeeping, and they speak from solemn
conviction based on personal experience."

"Moral: When the doctors differ, do as you please."

Three of the letters, reserved for the last on account of their unusual
bulk, contained actual plans. One was from an old school friend who had
married an architect and couldn't afford to send a wedding present, but
offered the plans as a sort of apology, privately feeling that they
would be the most valuable of all the gifts; the second was from a
married brother in Kansas who had just built himself a new house, and
thought his sister could not do better than use the same plans, which
he had "borrowed" from his architect; and the third was from Aunt
Melville, who was supposed (by herself) to hold the family destiny in
the hollow of her hand.

"For once," she wrote, "your father has done a most sensible thing.
Every girl ought to have a present of a new house on her wedding-day.
You were very silly to make such a fuss about the house that Jack
built, for it is a very stylish-looking house, even if it isn't quite
so convenient inside; but of course you can improve upon it, and
fortunately I can contribute just what you need--the plans of the house
that your Uncle Melville built for George last year. It isn't as large
as it ought to be, but it will suit you and Jack admirably. You must
tell me how much you have to spend. This house can be very prettily
built for eight or ten thousand dollars, and if you haven't as much as
that you must ask for more. The hall is decidedly stylish, and, with
the library at one side and drawing-room at the other, you will have
just room enough for your little social parties. The room behind the
drawing-room Jack needs for his private use, his study, office,
smoking-room or whatever he calls it--a place to keep his gun, his
top-boots, his fishing-rod and his horrid pipes; where he can revel to
his heart's content in the hideous disorder of a 'man's room,' pile as
much rubbish as he likes on the table, lock the doors and defy the rest
of the household on house-cleaning days. The dining-room is good and
the kitchen arrangements are perfect. George's wife has changed
servants but three times since they began housekeeping, nearly a year
ago, which certainly proves that there is every possible convenience
for doing work easily. The outside of the house is not wholly
satisfactory. There should be a tower, and you must put one on
somewhere."

[Illustration: COUSIN GEORGE'S FIRST FLOOR.]

[Illustration: COUSIN GEORGE'S SECOND FLOOR.]

Then followed several pages of advice about furnishings and a
postscript announced that Colonel Livingston was charmed with the house
and would probably build one like it for Clara. The charm of Aunt
Melville's advice lay in its abundant variety. It was new every morning
and fresh every evening. The latest thing was always the best. The
plans of to-morrow were certain to be better than those of yesterday.

Jill therefore made a careful study of the first installment, not
doubting that others of superior merit would be forthcoming. She found
many things to approve. The hall promised comfort and good cheer,
whether stylish or not. The vista across through the parlor bay and the
wide library window would give a pleasant freedom and breadth. The
stairs were well placed, the second landing with its window of stained
glass being especially attractive, whether as a point of observation or
as a cosy retreat, itself partly visible from the hall below. Every
chamber had a closet of its own, not to mention several extra ones, and
there was a place for every bed.

"As for your sanctum, Jack, I don't at all approve. It will be hard
enough, I've no doubt, to keep you from lapsing into barbarism, and I
shall never allow you to set up a den, a regular Bluebeard's room, all
by yourself. I promise never to put your table in order, but I wouldn't
trust the best of men with the care of a closet or a bureau-drawer for
a single week, much less of an entire room with two closets, a case of
drawers, a cupboard and a chimney-piece. But the chief fault of the
plan is that it doesn't happen to suit our lot. The entrances are not
right, the outlooks are not right, the chimneys are not right."

"Turn it around."

"And spoil it? No; I learned a second lesson on our journey, and it was
well worth what it cost. We shall never find a plan made for somebody
else that will suit us."

"Not good enough?"

"It isn't a question of goodness--it's a question of fitness. Neither
Cousin George's, nor any other house I ever saw, is precisely what we
need."

"Moral: Draw your own plans."

"We must, and we'll begin to-morrow."

"Why not this evening?"

"We couldn't see."

"Light the gas."

"Oh, but we must make the plans out of doors on the lot. We shall then
know where every room will be, every door and especially every window.
We must fix the centre of the sitting-room in the most commanding
situation, and be certain that the dining-room windows do not look
straight into somebody's wood-shed. Then, if there are any views of
blue hills and forests far away over the river, I shall be
uncomfortable if we do not get the full benefit of them."

"Don't you expect to have anything interesting inside the house?"

"Except my husband? Oh yes! but it would be a wicked waste of
opportunities not to accept the blessings provided for us without money
and without price, which only require us to stand in the right places
and open our hearts and windows to receive them."

Jill's second lesson was indeed worth learning, even if it cost a
wedding journey. Every house must suit its own ground and fit its own
household, otherwise it can neither be comfortable nor beautiful.

The next morning, armed with a bundle of laths, sharpened at one end,
and equipped with paper, pencil and tape-line, the prospective
house-builders proceeded to lay out, not the house but the plan. They
planted doors, windows, fireplaces and closets, stoves, lounges,
easy-chairs and bedsteads, as if they were so many seeds that would
grow up beside the laths on which their respective names were written
and bear fruit each according to its kind. Later in the day a high
step-ladder was introduced, from the top of which Jill scanned the
surrounding country, while Jack stood ready to catch her if she fell.
The neighbors were intensely interested, and their curiosity was mixed
with indignation when, toward night, a man was discovered cutting down
two of the rock-maple trees that Jill's grandfather planted more than
fifty years before, and which stood entirely beyond any possible
location of the new house.

"This evening, Jack, you must write for the architect to come."

"I thought you were going to make your own plans."

"I have made them, or rather I have laid them out on the ground and in
the air. I know what I want and how I want it. Now we must have every
particular set down in black and white."

Jack wrote accordingly. The architect was too busy to respond at once
in person, but sent a letter referring to certain principles that reach
somewhat below the lowest foundation-stones and above the tops of the
tallest chimneys.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER II.

MORAL SUASION FOR MALARIAL MARSHES.


"You are quite right," the architect wrote, "to fix the plan of your
house on the lot before it is made on paper, provided first the lot is
a good one. Nothing shows the innate perversity of mankind more
forcibly than the average character of the sites chosen for human
habitations in cities, in villages and in the open country. Or does it
rather indicate the instinctive struggle for supremacy over nature? The
'dear old nurse' is most peaceably inclined toward us, yet we shall
never be satisfied till all the valleys are exalted and the hills laid
low. Not because we object to hills and valleys--quite the contrary;
but we must show our strength and daring. Nobody wants the North Pole,
but we are furious to have a breach made in the wall that surrounds it.
If we discover a mighty primeval forest we straightway grind our axes
to cut it down; an open prairie we plant with trees. When we find
ourselves in an unclean, malarious bog, instead of taking the short cut
out, shaking the mud from our feet and keeping clear of it forever
after, we plunge in deeper still and swear by all the bones of our
ancestors that we will not only walk through it dry-shod, but will
build our homes in the midst of it and keep them clean and sweet and
dry. The good mother beckons to us with her sunshine and whispers
with her fragrant breezes that on the other side of the river or across
the bay the land is high and dry, that just beyond the bluffs are the
sunny slopes where she expected us to build our houses, and, like saucy
children as we are, we say that is the very reason we prefer to go
somewhere else.

[Illustration: WARMTH IS BEAUTY.]

[Illustration: A HIDDEN FOE.]

"Now, if the particular spot of earth on which you expect to set up the
temple of your home is not well adapted to that sacred purpose, think a
bit before you commence digging. If it is low, wet and difficult of
drainage; if the surface water or the drains from adjacent lands have
no outlet except across it; if its size and shape compel your house to
stand so near your neighbor on the south that he takes all the sunshine
and gives you the odors of his dinner and the conversation of his cook
in exchange; if there are no pleasant outlooks; if it is shaded by
trees owned by somebody who will not be persuaded to cut them down for
love nor money--by all means turn it into a fish-pond, a sheep-pasture
or a public park. You can never build upon it a satisfactory home.
Perhaps it is within five minutes' walk of the post-office and on the
same street with Mrs. Adoniram Brown, and these considerations outweigh
all others. In that case there is no help for you. You must make the
best of it as it is.

[Illustration: A BURIED GRIDIRON.]

"If you have a suspicion that the ground is naturally wet, that it
contains hidden springs or conceals an impervious basin, making in
effect a pool of standing water underground, the first necessity is a
clean outlet--not a sewer--low enough to underdrain the lot at least a
foot and a-half below the bottom of the cellar. Having found the clean
outlet, lay small drain tiles, two or three inches in diameter, under
the entire house and for several feet all around it, like a big
gridiron. When this is buried under one or two feet of clean gravel or
sand you will have a permanently dry plot of ground to build upon. The
same treatment will be effective if the ground is "springy." But there
must be a "cut-off" encircling the house. This you can make by digging
a trench a foot wide, reaching down to the drain tiles, and filling it
nearly to the top with loose stones or coarse gravel, the surface of
the ground being graded to slope sharply toward the trench. The surface
water between it and the house, and any moisture creeping toward the
house from without, will then be caught in this porous trap and fall to
the gridiron.

[Illustration: THE PROTECTING "CUT-OFF."]

"It is possible, theoretically, to build an underground cellar so tight
that it may be lifted up on posts and used for a water-tank, or set
afloat like a compartment-built iron steamer. Such walls may be
necessary under certain circumstances. They may be necessary for
cellars that are founded in swamps, in salt marshes below the level of
the sea, and in old river-beds, where the original iniquity of the
standing water is made still more iniquitous by the inevitable foulness
of the washing from streets and the unclean refuse from sinks and back
doors. But for buildings that have four independent walls, with room
enough for a man to ride around his own house in a wheelbarrow without
trespassing on his neighbors, and which are not hopelessly depressed
below all their surroundings, it is better to use a little moral
suasion on the land itself than to spend one's resources in a defiant
water-proof construction. Instead of drain tiles, small stones covered
with a thin layer of hay or straw before being buried in the sand may
be used if more economical.

"If you cannot find the clean outlet for these buried drains or tiles
below the level of the cellar bottom, then raise the cellar, house and
all. No matter if you are accused of having a 'stuck up' house--better
be stuck up than stuck in the mud. Raise it till the entire cellar is
well above the level of thorough drainage. If this happens to carry it
above the surface of the ground, set the house on posts and hang the
cellar under the floor like a work-bag under a table or the basket to a
balloon.

"The foundation walls must indeed touch solid bottom and extend below
the action of frost; but if the wall above the gridiron and below the
paving of the cellar is of hard stones, or very hard bricks laid in
cement, there will be little risk from rising moisture.

"After all, the chief danger is not from underground springs, from
clean surface water or an occasional rising of the floods, but from the
unclean wastes that in our present half-civilized state are constantly
going out of our homes to poison and pollute the earth and air around
them."

"Half-civilized indeed!" said Jack, interrupting the reading of the
letter. "Besides, he is premature as well as impertinent. He doesn't
know but the house will stand on a granite boulder."

"I suppose he intends to warn us, and I am not certain that our lot is
as dry as it ought to be. At all events we will have some holes dug in
different places and see if any water comes into them."

"Of course it will. Haven't we just had the 'equinoctial'? The ground
is full of water everywhere."

"If it is full this spring it will be full every spring. We may as well
order the drain tiles."

"It shall be done," said Jack. "Now let us have the second proviso. I
hope it will be shorter than the first."

"And, secondly," Jill continued reading, "provided you know what your
house is for. It is my conviction that of all the people who carefully
plan and laboriously build themselves houses, scarcely one in ten could
give a radical, intelligent reason for building them. To live in, of
course; but how to live is the question, and why. As they have been in
the habit of living? As their neighbors live? As they would like to
live? As they ought to live? Is domestic comfort and well-being the
chief motive? It is not, usually; hence, there are in the world a great
many more houses than homes."

"Oh, bother the preaching! It's all true, but we don't happen to need
it. When is he coming?"

"Next week, and he hopes we shall have 'some general idea of what we
want.' How very condescending! We know precisely what we want, as I can
easily show him."

[Illustration: A "CROSS-SECTION" PROPHECY.]

Jill accordingly produced a fresh sheet of "cross-section" paper, on
whose double plaid lines the most helpless tyro in drawing can make a
plan with mathematical accuracy provided he can count ten, and on this
began to draw the plan of the first floor, expounding as she drew.

"If we call the side of the house which is next the street the front,
the main entrance must be at the east side, because we need the whole
of the south side for our living rooms. You know the view toward the
southwest is the finest we shall have, especially from the chambers."

"How do I know? I didn't climb the step-ladder."

"And we must have a large bay window directly on that corner. The hall
must run through the house crosswise, with the stairs on the west side
of the house. As there is nothing to be seen in this direction except
the white walls and green blinds of the parsonage, the windows on the
stair-landing shall have stained glass. The dining-room will be at the
north side of the hall, with plenty of eastern windows, and behind that
the kitchen with windows at opposite sides. But you wouldn't understand
the beauty of my kitchen arrangements now. By-and-by, when you are
wiser, I will explain them. Do you like a fireplace in the hall, Jack?"

"I don't know as I do. Do you?"

"Of course! certainly."

"I shall be of all men most miserable without one. Can't we have two?"

"Perhaps so; but first let me read you Cousin Bessie's letter:

    MY DEAREST JILL: I'm perfectly delighted to hear about the new
    house. It will be an immense success. I _know_ it will--you are
    so wise and so _practical_. How I _shall_ enjoy visiting you!
    It is delightful to build houses now. Everybody thinks so much
    more of the beautiful than they used to. Some of my friends
    have the _loveliest_ rooms. The tones are _so_ harmonious, the
    decorations so _exquisite_! Such sympathetic feeling and
    spiritual unity! I _wish_ you could see Kitty Kane's hall. It
    isn't bigger than a bandbox, but there's the _cunningest_
    little fireplace in one corner, with real antique andirons and
    the quaintest old Dutch tiles. They never make a fire in it;
    couldn't if they wanted to--it smokes so. But it is _so_ lovely
    and gives the hall such a sweet expression. You _will_ forgive
    me, won't you, Jill, dear? but you know you are _so_ practical,
    and I _do_ hope you won't forget the esthetic needs of home
    life.                    Your loving cousin,                  BET."

"Let's give up the hall fireplace," said Jack.

[Illustration: HEAT FROM ALL SIDES.]

"By no means; our hall is large and needs a fireplace--one that will
not smoke and will warm not only the hall in very cold weather, but the
whole house when it isn't quite cold enough for steam. The sides and
back will be of iron with an air-chamber behind them, into which fresh
air will be brought from out of doors and come out well warmed at the
sides." (Jill's idea was something like the above figure for the plan.)

"It will be a capital ventilator, too, for the centre of the house.
There will be a damper in the hearth to let the ashes down into the
ash-pit. I suppose a stove would answer, but this will be better
because it won't have to be blacked, and it will last as long as the
house."

"How will it look standing out there all alone by itself?"

"Haven't I told you, my dear, that whatever _is_ well looks well?"

"Yes, but it takes a mighty faith to believe it, and I'm not even a
mustard-seed. What is the little room in the southwest corner for?"

"That is the library, and for an ordinary family it is large enough. It
is twelve feet by fourteen. It will hold three or four thousand books,
a table, a writing-desk, a lounge and three or four easy chairs. More
room would spoil the privacy which belongs to a library and make it a
sort of common sitting-room. Moreover, by drawing aside the portières
and opening the doors we can make it a part of the large room when we
wish to; and, on the other hand, when they are closed and the bay
window curtains drawn, instead of one large room we shall have three
separate apartments for three solitary misanthropes, for three
_tête-a-têtes_, or for three incompatible groups, not counting the
hall--no, nor the stair-landing, which will be a capital place for a
quiet--"

"Flirtation."

At this point they were interrupted by a telegram from Aunt Melville,
begging them not to begin on George's plan, as she had found something
much more satisfactory.




CHAPTER III.

A FIRST VISIT AND SAGE ADVICE.


They didn't begin to build, from Cousin George's nor from any other
plan, for many weeks. Until the new house should be completed, Jill had
agreed to commence housekeeping in the house that Jack built, without
making any alterations in it, only reserving the privilege of finding
all the fault she pleased to Jack privately, in order, as she said, to
convince him that it would be impossible for them to be permanently
happy in such a house.

"I supposed," said Jack, with a groan, "that my company would make you
blissfully happy in a cave or a dug-out."

"So it would, if we were bears--both of us. As we are sufficiently
civilized, taken together, to prefer artificial dwellings, it will be
much better for us to find out what we really need in a home by actual
experiment for a year or two. You know everybody who builds one house
for himself always wishes he could build another to correct the
mistakes of the first."

"Yes, and when he has done it probably finds worse blunders in the
second. Still, I'm open to conviction, and after our late architectural
tour perhaps my house won't seem in comparison so totally depraved."

[Illustration: AUNT MELVILLE'S AMBITION.]


When they visited it, preparatory to setting up their household
gods--Jack's bachelor arrangements being quite inadequate to the new
order of things--Jack, with a flourish, threw the highly ornamental
front door wide open. Jill walked solemnly in, and, looking neither to
the right nor the left, went straight up stairs.

"Hello!" Jack called after her, "what are you going up stairs for?"

"I supposed you expected everybody to go to the second floor," said
Jill, looking over the bannister, "or you wouldn't have set the stairs
directly across the front entrance."

"I do, of course," Jack responded, following three steps at a time.
"And now will you please signify your royal pleasure as to apartments?"

"Oh, yes! The first requisite is a room with at least one south
window."

"Here it is. A southerly window and a cloudy sky--two windows, in fact.
And look here: see what a glorious closet. It goes clear up to the
ceiling."

"It isn't a closet at all; only a little cupboard. It wouldn't hold
one-half of your clothes nor a tenth part of mine. And there's no
fireplace in the room--not even a hole for a stovepipe."

"Furnace, my dear. We shall be warmed from the regions below. There's
the register."

"I see. But where shall the bed stand? On these two sides it would come
directly in front of a window; on this side there isn't room between
the two doors; on that, there's the 'set bowl'--I hate 'set
bowls'--and the furnace register in the floor."

[Illustration: NO PLACE FOR THE BED.]

"That's so. I never had any bed in this room. Try the dining-room
chamber; that has a south window. The bed can stand on the north side
and the dressing table over in the other corner."

"Yes, in the dark, with a window behind my back. Oh! Jack, why didn't
you get a wife before you planned your house?"

"I did try."

"You did! You never mentioned it to me before. What is this little room
for?"

"Why, nothing in particular. It came so, I suppose--part of the hall,
you know; but it wouldn't be of any use in the hall, so I made a room
of it. It will hold a cot bed if we should happen to have a house full
of company."

"It will never be needed for that with three other guest rooms; but I
see what can be done. You know I promised not to make any alterations;
but destruction isn't alteration, and as this little room is beside the
front chamber, with only the little cupboards between, a part of the
partition between the rooms can be destroyed. There will be no need of
a door; a portière will be better, and I can use the small room for a
dressing-room and closet. So _that_ is nicely arranged; and while you
are marking where the partition is to be cut away I will explore the
first story."

[Illustration: ENLARGED BY DESTRUCTION.]

Now, the stairs were built in a very common fashion, having a sharp
turn at the top, which made the steps near the balustrade exceedingly
steep and narrow. Jill's foot slipped on the top step and down she
went, feet foremost, never stopping till she reached the hall floor
below. Jack, hearing the commotion, ran to the rescue, caught his foot
in the carpet and came tumbling after, with twice as much noise and not
half as much grace. Happily the staircase was well padded under the
carpet, and finding Jill unhurt as well as himself, Jack helped her to
rise and coolly remarked:

"You certainly can't find any fault with the stairs, Jill, dear. If
there had been one of those square landings midway it would have taken
twice as long to come down. I--I had them made so on purpose. Will you
walk into my parlor?"

They went in and sat down in easy-chairs.

"I suppose," said Jill, "that our native land contains about a million
houses with stairs like these and just such halls--if people will
persist in calling them 'halls,' when they are only little narrow,
dark, uncomfortable entries. If we were going to make any alterations
in this house--which we are not, only destructions--- I should take
these out, cut them in two in the middle, double them up, straighten
the crook at the top and shove them outside the house, letting the main
roof drop down to cover them. Then I would make a large landing at the
turn, large enough for a wide seat, a few book shelves and a pretty
window. This could be of stained glass, unless the view outside is more
interesting than the window itself. The merit of a stained-glass
window," Jill observed, very wisely, "is that the sunlight makes a
beautiful picture of it inside the house during the day, and the same
thing, still more beautiful, is thrown out into the world by the
evening lamps, and the darker the night the brighter the picture. After
the stairs were moved out, the little hall, if joined by a wide
doorway, to the room we are now in would become of some value. There is
no grate in this room, and a chimney might be built in the outer wall,
with a fireplace opposite the wide doorway. Then, taken all together,
we should have a very pretty sitting-room. I shouldn't call that an
alteration--should you, Jack?--only an addition."

[Illustration: A SLIGHT ADDITION.]

"Certainly not. Tearing down partitions, taking out plumbing, building
a few chimneys, moving stairways, and such little things, can't be
called 'alterations'--oh, no."

"And the house will be worth so much more when you come to sell it."

"Of course. But why do you call this a 'sitting-room?' It wouldn't be
possible to sell a house that has no parlor; besides this is marked
'parlor' on the plan."

"I prefer the spirit of the plan to the letter of it. This is the
pleasantest room--almost the only pleasant room on this floor. It is
sunny and convenient, it looks out upon the street and across the lawn,
and whatever it is labeled it will _be_ our common every-day
sitting-room. For similar reasons we will take the chamber over it for
our own room."

"What becomes of our hospitality if we keep the best for ourselves?"

"What becomes of our common sense if we make ourselves uncomfortable
the year round in order to make a guest a little less uncomfortable
over night. I try to love my neighbor as myself; I can't love him three
hundred and sixty-five times as well. Now, if you are rested, we will
go and see if the architect has come."

He had not arrived, but they found a ponderous package of plans from
Aunt Melville, with an explanatory note, a letter from Cousin Bessie
admonishing Jill that her new home ought to be "a perfect poem,
pervaded and perfumed by a rare feeling of tender longing and homely
aspiration," and another from her father's oldest sister.

[Illustration: GROUND FLOOR OF AUNT MELVILLE'S AMBITION.]

[Illustration: FIRST FLOOR OF AUNT MELVILLE'S AMBITION.]

"For fifty years," Aunt Jerusha wrote, "I have lived in what would now
be called an old-fashioned house, though it was new enough when I came
to it, and I always think of the Scripture saying when I hear about the
many inventions that men have sought out and are putting into houses
now-a-days. The danger is not so much from the inventions themselves as
from what they lead to. They promise great things, but I've learned to
be suspicious of anything or anybody that makes large promises. I've
learned, too, that realities sometimes go by contraries as well as
dreams. The poorest folks are often the richest, and the greatest
saving often turns out to be the greatest waste. Air-tight stoves saved
the wood-pile, but they gave us colds and headaches. So your uncle put
them away and we went back to the fireplaces. Then came the hot-air
furnaces, which seemed so much less trouble than open fires, but taking
care of the open fires wasn't half so troublesome as taking care of
sick folks; and the same thing we learned to our bitter cost of the
plumbing pipes that creep around like venomous serpents and promise to
save so many steps. Perhaps they do, but it seems to me that much of
our vaunted labor-saving is at best only a transfer. We work all the
harder at something else or compel others to work for us. When I began
housekeeping I had no difficulty in taking care of my large house
without any help, nor in caring for my family while it was small. Yet I
hadn't a single modern invention or labor-saving machine, I have had a
great many since and have tried a great many more. When I find one that
helps in the work that _must_ be done I am glad to keep it. If it
merely does something new--something I had never done before--I keep
the old way. Multiplying wants may be a means of grace to the
half-civilized, but our danger lies in the other direction: we have too
many wants already. And this is what I sat down to say to you, my dear
child: Don't make housekeeping such a complex affair that you must give
to it all your time and strength, leaving no place for the 'better
part.' Don't fill your house with furniture too fine to be used, and
don't try to have everything in the latest fashion. I see many
beautiful things and read of many more, but nothing is half so
beautiful to me as the things that were new fifty years ago and are
still in daily use. Of planning houses I know but little. For one
thing, I should say, have the kitchen and working departments as close
at hand as possible. This will save many weary steps, whether you do
your own work or leave it with servants, the best of whom need constant
watching and encouragement, or they will not make life any easier or
better worth living."

"Isn't this rather a solemn letter?" Jack inquired.

"Yes; it's a solemn subject."

"_Shall_ you 'do your own work'?"

"Of course I shall. How can I help it?

     'Each hath a work that no other can do;'

but just precisely what my own work will be I am not at present
prepared to say."

"Is Aunt Melville as solemn as Aunt Jerusha?"

"Aunt Melville assures her dear niece that 'the last plans are
absolutely beyond criticism: the rooms are large and elegant, the
modern conveniences perfect, the kitchen and servants' quarters
isolated from the rest of the house'--"

"That won't suit the other aunty."

"The porte cochère and side entrance most convenient and the front
entrance sufficiently distinguished by the tower. I particularly like
the porte cochère at the side. If none of your callers came on foot
there would be no objection to having it at the front entrance, but it
isn't pleasant to be compelled to walk up the carriage-way. As you
see, this is a brick house, and I am persuaded you ought to build of
bricks. It will cost ten or fifteen per cent. more--possibly
twenty--but in building a permanent home you ought not to consider the
cost for a moment.'"

"That's a comfortable doctrine, if everybody would live up to it," said
Jack.

"Yes; and like a good many other comfortable doctrines, it contains too
much truth to be rejected--not enough to be accepted. We _must_ count
the cost, but if we limit ourselves to a certain outlay, and positively
refuse to go beyond that, we shall regret it as long as we live. We may
leave some things unfinished, but whatever is done past alteration,
either in size or quality, must be right, whatever it costs."

And herein Jill displayed her good sense. It is, indeed, a mistake to
build a house beyond the possibility of paying for it, or of
maintaining it without a constant struggle, but in building a permanent
home there is more likely to be lasting regret through too close
economy in the first outlay, than through extravagance--regret that can
only be cured by an outlay far exceeding what the original cost would
have been.

The architect came as the sun went down, and, after being duly warmed,
fed and cheered, was informed by Jill that all she expected from him
that evening was an explanation of the respective merits of wood and
brick houses. Jack begged the privilege of taking notes, to keep
himself awake, Jill begged the architect to be as brief as possible,
and the architect begged for a small blackboard and a piece of chalk,
that he might, in conveying his ideas, use the only one, true, natural
and universal language which requires no grammar, dictionary or
interpreter.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER IV.

MANY FIRES MAKE SMALL DIVIDENDS.


There are two things belonging to modern civilization," the architect
began, "that fill me with amazement. This morning, at the usual hour, I
sat at my own breakfast table. During the day I have been reading and
writing, eating, drinking and making merry with pleasant acquaintances,
old and new. I have observed the architecture of a dozen cities and a
hundred villages and have seen landscapes without number. I have been
occupying an elegantly finished and furnished drawing-room all the
time, with every possible comfort and convenience at hand, and now am
sitting at your fireside, two hundred and fifty miles from home. I have
just assured the girl I left behind me of my safe arrival, and have
listened to her grateful reply. With my ten thousand companions going
in the same direction I have met ten thousand others crossing and
recrossing our path, every one of whom was as safe and comfortable as
ourselves, every one of whom knew the hour and the minute at which he
would reach his destination. To an observer above the clouds our
pathways would appear more frail than the finest gossamer; and the most
daring engineer that ever lived, seeing for the first time our mode of
travel, would stake his reputation that we were rushing to
inevitable destruction. Yet every foot of our way has been so guarded
that not one of these swiftly-moving palaces has swerved from its track
or been hindered on its course. This annihilation of space, with the
human skill, vigilance and fidelity incidental to it, are more
wonderful to me than any tales of magic, stranger than any fiction. I
believe because I see; nevertheless it is incredible. My second
amazement is that fire insurance companies should continue to live and
thrive against such apparently fearful odds, for I see whole villages
and cities composed of buildings that seem expressly designed to invite
speedy combustion, and at the same time to resist all attempts to
extinguish a fire once started in their complex interiors. Indeed, the
most effective modes of treatment yet discovered for a burning building
are drowning it with all its contents in a deluge of water or blowing
it up with gunpowder. It is an open question which of the two methods
is to be preferred.

[Illustration: A SECURE OUTLOOK.]

"Let me show you how a wooden house is built. The sills and joists of
the first floor are comparatively safe, because they are not boxed in
with dry boards, and even with furnace and ash-pits in the cellar there
would be little danger from a fire down below if it were not for the
careful provision made for carrying it into the upper part of the
structure. This provision, however, is most effectively made by means
of the upright studs and furrings that stand all around the outside of
the building and reach across it wherever a partition is needed.
Accordingly, every wooden house has from one hundred to one thousand
wooden flues of a highly inflammable character arranged expressly to
carry fire from the bottom to the top, valiantly consuming themselves
in the operation. Furthermore, they are frequently charged with
shavings and splinters of wood, which, becoming dry as tinder, will
respond at once to a spark from a crack in the chimney, an overheated
stove or furnace-pipe, or a match in the hands of an inquisitive
mouse. They are, likewise, so arranged that no water can be poured
inside them till they fall apart and the house collapses, for they
reach to the roof, whose sole duty is to keep out water, whether it
comes from the clouds or from a hose-pipe, but which, for economical
reasons, is made sufficiently open to allow the air to pass through it
freely, thus insuring a good draught when the fire begins to burn. To
complete the system and prevent the possibility of finding where the
fire began, the spaces between the joists of the upper floors
communicate with the vertical flues, and these highways and byways for
rats and mice, for fire and smoke, for odors from the kitchen, noises
from the nursery and dust from the furnace and coal-bin, are also
strewn with builders' rubbish, which carries flame like stubble on a
harvest-field.

[Illustration: MINED AND COUNTERMINED.]

"Brick houses, as usually built, are not much better, but that is not
the fault of the bricks--_they_ are tougher than good intentions; they
have been burned once and fire agrees with them. In fact, there is no
building material so thoroughly reliable, through thick and thin, in
prosperity and in adversity, as good, honest, well-burned bricks. But
the ordinary brick house is double--a house within a house--a wooden
frame in a brick shell. Like logs in a coal-pit, the inner house is
well protected from outside attacks, but the flames, once kindled
within, will run about as freely as in a wooden building, and laugh at
cold water, which, however abundantly it is poured out, can never reach
the heart of the fire till its destructive work is accomplished. Thrown
upon the outer walls, it runs down the bricks or clapboards; poured
over the roof, it is carried promptly to the ground, as it ought to
be; shot in through the windows, it runs down the plastering, washes
off the paper, soaks the carpets, ruins the merchandise and spoils
everything that water can spoil, while the fire itself roars behind the
wainscot, climbs to the rafters and rages among the old papers, cobwebs
and heirlooms in the attic till the roof falls in, the floors go down
with a crash and an upward shower of sparks, and only the tottering
walls, with their eyeless window sockets, or the ragged, blackened
chimney's, remain."

"One road leads to fire and the other to combustion; that's plain
enough," said Jack; "but where do the merits come in? I thought we were
to learn the relative merits of bricks and wood."

"Wood has one conspicuous merit, a virtue that covers a multitude of
sins--it is cheap; but let me first arrange the fire-escapes."

"By all means. Otherwise we shall be cremated before morning."

"If you understand my sketch you will see that but one thing is needful
to retard the progress of hidden fire, even in a wooden building, long
enough at least for one to go up the hill and fetch a pail of water.
This remedy consists simply in choking the flues and stopping the
draught, which can easily be done by filling in with bricks and mortar
between all the studs of both outer walls and inner partitions at or
near the level of each floor. A cut-off half way up is an additional
safeguard. The horizontal passages between the floor-joists should also
be closed in a similar manner, otherwise the smoke and sparks from a
burning lath next the kitchen stove-pipe will come up through the
cracks in the floor of the parlor, chamber, or around some remote
fireplace, where the insurance agent will be assured 'there hadn't been
a fire kindled for six months.' These occasional dampers are a partial
remedy, and if carefully fitted in the right places will save many tons
of coal and greatly diminish the chances of total destruction in case
of fire. The complete remedy is to leave no spaces that can possibly be
filled.

[Illustration: A DORMER OF BURNED CLAY.]

"I supposed air spaces were necessary for warmth and dryness," said
Jill.

"So they are. But there are air spaces in a woolen blanket, in a
brickbat and in common mortar, as well as in sawdust, ashes and
powdered charcoal, quite enough to serve as non-conductors of heat and
of moisture too, if properly protected. One of the best and most
available materials at present known for this purpose is 'mineral
wool,' a product of iron 'slag.' If the open spaces between the studs
and rafters of a wooden building (or in a brick building between the
furrings) are filled with this substance, or anything else equally
good, if there is anything else--of course sawdust or other
inflammable material would not answer except for an ice-house or a
water-tank--'fire-bugs' would find it difficult to follow their
profession with any success, and the insurance companies would build
more elegant offices and declare larger dividends than ever before.
Houses might be burned possibly, but the inmates would have ample time
to fold their nightgowns, pack their trunks, take up the carpets and
count the spoons before vacating the premises."

"How much will that sort of stuffing cost?"

"For a wooden dwelling house of medium size a few hundred dollars would
cover the first outlay, and the saving in worry would be worth twice as
much every year."

"Now to consider the relative merits of brick and wood, for I see Jack
is going to sleep again: The chief excellence of wood has already been
mentioned. It is cheap, so cheap that any man who can earn a dollar a
day and live on fifty cents, may at the end of a year, have a house of
his own in which he can live and begin to bring up a family in comfort
and safety. He that builds of bricks may rejoice in the durability and
strength of his house, in its security against fire and sudden changes
of temperature, in economy of fuel in cold weather, of ice in warm
weather, and of paint in all weathers; in the possibility of the
highest degree of external beauty, and in the blessed consciousness
that his real estate will not deteriorate on his hands or be a worn-out
and worthless legacy to his children."

"You must wear peculiar spectacles if you can discover beauty in a
square brick house!"

[Illustration: THE TOPMOST PEAK.]

"Rectitude, of which a brick is the accepted type, certainly has a
beauty of its own. But if a brick house is not beautiful--here again
the fault is not, dear Jack, in the bricks; but in ourselves, our
prejudices and our architects--other things being equal, it should be
more beautiful than a wooden house, because the material employed is
more appropriate for its use. (I should like to deliver an oration at
this point, for upon this Golden Rule of utility hang all the law and
the prophets of architectural beauty, but will defer it to a more
fitting occasion.) There is, in truth, no limit to the grace of form,
color and decoration possible with burned clay. As a marble statue is
to a wooden image, so, for the outer walls of a building, is clay that
has been moulded and baked, to the products of the saw-mill, the
planing-mill, lathe and fret-saw."

"Oh, you mean terra cotta?"

"I mean clay that has been wrought into forms of use and beauty, and
prepared by fire to endure almost to the end of time. It is most
commonly found in plain rectangular blocks, but in accordance with the
artistic spirit of the age, brains are now mixed with the sordid earth,
and lasting beauty glows upon the rich, warm face of the strong brick
walls."--

"Yea, verily, amen and amen! Beauty, eloquence and true poetry, bright
gleams of prophetic fire, patriotism, piety and the music of the
spheres. I can see them all in my mind's eye and hear them in my mind's
ear. Jill, my dear, our house shall be bricks--excuse me, I mean
_brains_--and mortar, from turret to foundation stone. Consider that
settled, and if the meeting is unanimous we will now adjourn till
to-morrow morning."

"One moment, if you please. Filling the spaces behind the lathing in a
brick house with some fireproof and non-conducting material is a
concession to usual modes of building. A more satisfactory construction
still would be to build the wails of hollow bricks and with air spaces
so disposed that neither wood furrings nor laths would be necessary.
There is, moreover, no good reason why the inner surfaces of the main
walls of a brick house and both sides of the partitions should not form
the final finish of the rooms. Glazed bricks or tiles built into the
walls, or secured to them after they are built, are vastly more
satisfactory than a fragile and incongruous patchwork of wood, leather,
metal, paper, paint and mortar, thrown together in some of the thousand
and one fantastic fashions that spring up in a day, run their little
course, and speedily return to the dust they have spent their short
lives in collecting. I am afraid to dwell on this theme lest I should
lie awake all night in a fever of futile protest."

"Pray don't run any risks. I move we now adjourn."

"Yes; but first let me ask one question," said Jill. "Would not the
difference of cost between a house built in the ordinary combustible
style and the same made fire-proof, or even 'slow-burning,' pay the
cost of insurance at the usual rates many times over and leave a large
margin besides?"

"Undoubtedly it would."

"Then, as an investment, what object is there in attempting to make
buildings fireproof or even approximately so?"

"Excuse me. I thought you were going to ask only one question."




CHAPTER V.

WHEN THE FLOODS BEAT AND THE RAINS DESCEND.


After the architect had retired to his room it occurred to him that he
might have answered Jill's conundrum as to the profit of building
fire-proof houses by reminding her that pecuniary loss is not the sole
objection to being burned out of house and home whenever the fire fiend
happens to crave a flaming sacrifice, in the daytime or in the night,
in summer or in midwinter, in sickness or in health; that not only
heir-looms, but hearthstones and door posts, endeared by long
associations, have a value beyond the power of insurance companies to
restore, and that protection against fire means also security against
many other ills to which the dwellers in houses are liable, not to
refer to the larger fact that there is no real wealth without
permanence, while the destruction of anything useful in the world,
wherever the loss may seem to fall, impoverishes the whole. Having
settled this point to his own satisfaction, he sought his pillow in a
comfortable frame of mind. Comfortable, but not wholly at rest, for no
sooner did he close his eyes than the "fever of futile protest"
asserted itself in turbulent visions of paper, paint and plastering.
Dados danced around in carnival dress; wall decorations went waltzing
up and down, changing in shape, size and color like the figures in a
kaleidoscope; Chinese pagodas on painted paper dissolved into brazen
sconces, and candelabra sat where no light would ever shine; glazed
plaques turned into Panama hats and cotton umbrellas, the classic
figures in the frieze began to chase the peacocks furiously across the
ceilings, the storks hopped wildly around on their one available leg,
draperies of every conceivable hue and texture, from spider webs to
sole leather, shaking the dust from their folds, slipped uneasily about
on their glittering rings, and showers of Japanese fans floated down
like falling apple blossoms in the month of May. He seemed to see the
Old Curiosity Shop, the uncanny room of Mr. Venus, a dozen foreign
departments of the Centennial, ancient garrets and modern household art
stores, all tumbled together in hopeless confusion, and over all an
emerald, golden halo that grew more and more concentrated till it burst
into gloom as one gigantic sunflower, which, suddenly changing into the
full moon just rising above the top of a neighboring roof, put an end
to his chaotic dreams.

Not willing to be moonstruck, even on the back of his head, he arose
and went to the window to draw the curtain. There was a sort of
curtainette at the top, opaque and immovable, serving simply to reduce
the height of the window. At the sides there were gauzy draperies, too
fancifully arranged to be rashly moved and too thin to serve the
purpose of a curtain even against moonlight. He tried to close the
inside shutters, but they clung to their boxes, refusing to stir
without an order from the carpenter. At the risk of catching a cold or
a fall, he opened the window and endeavored to bring the outside
blinds together. One fold hung fast to the wall, the other he contrived
to unloose, but the hook to hold it closed was wanting, and when he
tried to fasten it open again the catch refused to catch, so he was
compelled to shut the window and leave the swinging blind at the mercy
of the wind. He then improvised a screen from a high-backed chair and
an extra blanket, and again betook himself to bed. Stepping on a tack
that had been left over when the floor matting was laid provoked
certain exclamations calculated to exorcise the demon--or should I say
alarm the angel?--of decorative art, and he was soon wrapped in the
slumber of the just, undisturbed by esthetic visions.

[Illustration: WILL'S MASTERPIECE.]

After a time he became dimly conscious of a sense of alarm. At first,
scarcely roused to understand the fear or its cause, he soon recognized
a noise that filled his soul with terror--the stealthy sound of a
midnight assassin; a faint rasping, intermittent and cautious, a sawing
or filing the bolt of his door. He made a motion to spring up, upset a
glass of water by his bedside and--frightened the rats from the
particular hole they were trying to gnaw. In their sudden fright they
dropped all pretense of secresy. They called each other aloud by name
and scattered acorns, matches, butternuts and ears of corn in every
direction, which rolled along the ceiling, fell down the partitions,
knocked the mortar off the back of the laths and raised such a noisy
commotion as ought to have roused the whole neighborhood. No one
stirred, and the architect once more addressed himself to blessed
sleep, feeling that morning must soon put an end to his tribulations.
How long he slept he had no means of knowing. It was still dark when he
awoke: dark but not still. A distant footfall tinkled on the matted
floor, followed by another and another in rapid, measured succession.
Could there be a cat or a dog in the room? He could see nothing. The
moon was gone and the room was dark as Egypt. Possibly some animal
escaped from a traveling menagerie had hidden in the chamber. He lay
still and listened while the step--step--step--kept on without break or
change. Presently he thought of ghosts, and as ghosts were the one
thing he was not afraid of he turned over and went to sleep for good
just as the village clock struck eleven.

In the morning when he awoke, it rained. The ghostly footfalls
continued; in fact, they had considerably increased, but they were no
longer ghostly. A dark spot on the ceiling directly over the portfolio
of plans he had laid on the floor betrayed their source. Portfolio and
contents were as well soaked as if the fire companies had been at
them--all from a leak in the roof.

After breakfast, when Jill proposed to spend the time till it cleared
off in looking over the plans he had brought, the architect was obliged
to explain the disaster.

"It is just as well," said he. "I brought them because you asked me to
bring them, not because I supposed there would be one among them that
would suit you. But they are not wasted. These poor, dumb, dripping
plans preach a most eloquent sermon, the practical application of which
is only too evident."

"But how _can_ you make a tight roof? There has always been a leak here
when it rains with the wind in a certain quarter. We keep a pan under
it all the time, but somebody forgot to empty it; so it ran over last
night."

"You ought to see the house that I built," said Jack. "The wind may
blow where it listeth and never a drop comes through the roof."

"Oh, Jack, what a story! Only yesterday you showed me where the ceiling
was stained and the paper just ready to come off."

"That wasn't from rain water. It was from snow and ice water, which is
a very different affair. We had peculiar weather last winter. I know a
man who lost three thousand dollars' worth of frescoes in one night."

"It is indeed a different matter as regards the construction of the
roof, but the water is wet all the same, and a roof is inexcusable that
fails to keep all beneath it dry, however peculiar the weather may be.
No, it is not difficult to make a tight roof with the aid of common
sense and common faithfulness. The most vulnerable spots during a rain
storm are beside the dormers and the chimneys, over the bay-window
roofs and in the valleys, that is, wherever the plane surface and the
uniform slope of the roof is broken. In guarding these it is not safe
to assume that water never runs up hill; a strong wind will drive it up
the slope of a roof under slates, shingles or flashings as easily as it
drives up the high tide of Lincolnshire. It will cause the water
pouring down the side of a chimney, a dormer window, or any other
vertical wall, to run off in an oblique direction and into cracks that
never thought of being exposed to falling rain. 'Valleys' fail to
carry their own rivers when they are punctured by nails carelessly
driven too far within their borders; when the rust that corrupts the
metal of which they are commonly composed has eaten their substance
from the under side perhaps, their weakness undiscovered till the
torrent breaks through; when they become choked with leaves and dust
and overflow their banks; when they are torn asunder by their efforts
to accommodate themselves to changes of temperature, and when ice cakes
come down from the steep roofs and break holes through them.

"The other danger is peculiar to cold climates, where the roof must
protect not only from driving rain but from snow and ice in all their
moods and tenses. When the higher peaks feel the warmth of the sun or
the internal heat of the building, the lower slopes and valleys being
without such influence, it sometimes happens that the rills will be set
to running by the warmth of the upper portions, while the colder
climate below will stop them in their course, building around the
slate, shingles or tiles an impervious ice dam, from which the
descending streams can find no outlet except by 'setting back' under
the slates and running down inside. Eave spouts and conductors are
especially liable to this climatic influence, for nothing is more
common than to find them freezing in the shade while the roofs above
are basking in the sun. As Jack observes, admitting water above an ice
dam is a different kind of sin in a roof from that which caused the
ruin of my plans last night, but it is no less unpardonable. The same
treatment that will make a roof non-conducting of fire will, to some
extent, overcome this danger, or a double boarding may be laid upon the
rafters, with an air space between. This or the mineral wool packing
will prevent the premature melting of snow from the internal heat. The
only sure salvation for gutters is to take them down and lay them away
in a cool, dry place. Thorough work, ample outlets and abundant room
for an overflow on the outward side will make them reasonably safe. In
general it is better to let the water fall to the ground, as directly
as possible, and let the snow slide where it will, provided there is
nothing below to be injured by an avalanche. A hundred-weight of warm
snow or a five-pound icicle falling ten feet upon a slated roof or a
conservatory skylight is sure to make a lasting impression."

"Isn't this discourse a little out of season?" said Jack. "We don't buy
furs in July nor refrigerators in January. If you expect advice to be
followed, you mustn't offer it too long beforehand. Now, as your plans
haven't yet recovered from their bath, let us see if Jill's air-castles
can be brought down to the region of human possibilities."

"I am not quite ready for that," said Jill. "First, let me show you the
plans my old friend has sent me, and read you her description of them.
Here are the plans and here is the letter:

"'Of all the plans Will has ever made'--her 'Will' is an architect, you
know--'these seem to me most likely to suit you and Jack, although they
are by no means, adapted to conventional, commonplace housekeepers. In
the centre of the first floor the large hall, opening freely to the
outside world, is a sort of common ground, hospitable and cheerful,
where the stranger guest and the old friend meet; where the children
play, where the entire household are free to come and go without
formality. The furniture it contains is for use and comfort. It is
never out of order, because it is subject to no formal rules. At the
left of the hall is the real family home, more secluded and more
significant of your own taste and feeling. Instead of many separate
apartments for general family use, here are drawing-room, sitting-room,
library and parlor, all in one. This is the domestic sanctuary, the
essential family home into which outsiders come only by special
invitation. From the central hall runs the staircase that leads to the
still more personal and private apartments above, one of which belongs
to each member of the family. At the right of the hall is the
dining-room, near enough to make its contribution to physical comfort
and enjoyment at the proper time, but easily excluded when its inferior
service is not required.'

"I don't understand that," said Jill.

"I do," said Jack. "It means that the meat that perisheth ought not to
be set above the feast of reason and flow of soul; that the dining-room
ought to be convenient but subordinate, not the most conspicuously
elegant part of the establishment, unless we keep a boarding-house and
reckon eating the chief end of man. Where do you say the library is?"

"Included in the drawing-room. Probably the corner marked 'Boudoir'
contains a writing desk with more or less books and other literary
appliances. It has a fireplace of its own and portières would give it
complete seclusion."

[Illustration: FIRST FLOOR OF WILL'S MASTERPIECE.]

"Where is the smoking-room?"

"I don't know. She didn't send the plans for the stable."

"How savage! Please go on with the letter."

Jill continued:

"'The floors of the dining-room and hall are on the same level, but
that of the drawing-room is one or two feet higher--'

"I don't like that at all. Should stumble forty times a day."

"'--which is typical of its higher social plane, makes a charming
raised seat on the platform at the foot of the stairs, and gives a more
picturesque effect than would be possible if all the rooms were on a
par.'

"Can't help that. I shouldn't like it. I'd rather be a commonplace
housekeeper."

"'The higher broad landing in the staircase, running quite across the
hall, makes a sort of gallery with room for a few book-shelves, a
lounging-seat in the window, a band of musicians on festival occasions,
with perhaps a pretty view from the window.'

"If the landscape happens to fit the plan."

"'Under the lower portion, of the stairs there is a toilet room, and at
the same end of the hall wide doors lead to the piazza. A long window
also gives access to the same piazza from the drawing-room. In the
second story the chambers have plenty of closets and dressing-rooms,
and yet but few doors. Indeed, many of these may be omitted by using
portières between each chamber and its dressing-room. You will notice,
too, that by locking one door on each story the servants' quarters can
be entirely detached from the rest of the house.'

"Yes," said Jill, laying down the letter; "and that suggests another
question: What do you think of a plan like this which provides no
passage from the kitchen to the front part of the house except across
the dining-room?"

[Illustration: SECOND FLOOR OF WILL'S MASTERPIECE.]

"I should refer the question back to the housekeepers themselves; it
is domestic rather than architectural. If the kitchen servant attends
to the door bell, and is constantly sailing back and forth between the
cooking-stove and the front door like a Fulton Ferry boat, the amount
of travel would justify a special highway--even a suspension bridge.
Likewise, when the side entrance for the boys and other careless
members of the family is behind the dining-room, that apartment will
become a noisy thoroughfare, unless there is a corridor passing around
it. This is a common dilemma in planning the average house, and while a
direct communication between the front and rear portions is always
desirable, crossing one of the principal rooms is often the least of
two evils. It seems to be so in this plan."

"Go on, Jill."

"There is but one more sentence about the plan: 'The outside of the
house is severely plain, but you can easily make it more ornamental.'"

"That's true. Nothing is easier than to make things ornamental. The
hard thing is to make them simply useful. Now if you want my candid
opinion of this plan," Jack continued, "I should say it is first-rate
if the front door looks toward the east: if there is a grand view of
rivers and mountains toward the southwest; if the family live on the
west piazza all the forenoon; if they board a moderate family of
servants in the north end (which I notice is a few steps lower than the
dining-room--for social reasons, I suppose)--if they keep up rather a
'tony' style of living in the south end; are not above condescending to
men of low estate to the extent of receiving common people in the big
hall, but holding themselves about two steps above the average human;
and, finally, if and provided the butler's pantry is made as large
again for a smoking-room, and the kitchen pantry made large enough to
hold the butler. With these few remarks, I think we may lay this set of
plans on the table."

[Illustration]




CHAPTER VI.

THE WISDOM OF JILL IN THE KITCHEN.


"Perhaps Jack will remember," said Jill, as she prepared to explain her
plans, "that we examined not long ago a large number of somewhat
pretentious houses, but did not find one that was satisfactory, the
defects being usually in what I should call the working department of
the house. The large front rooms were often exceedingly charming,
elegantly furnished and well arranged."

"For which reason," said Jack, "the family seemed to be religiously
kept out of them unless they had on their company manners and their
Sunday clothes, or wished to make themselves particularly miserable by
having a wedding, a sewing society or an evening party."

"The rear boundary of the dining-room seemed like Mason and Dixon's
line in the old times; once beyond it, we entered a region 'without law
or ornament or order,' a realm of architectural incompetence, confusion
and evil work--if it is fair to call the arrangements of the domestic
part of a house an architectural matter."

"Certainly it is," Jack affirmed, "and it's my opinion that no
architect ought to receive his diploma until he has served one year in
a first-class family as cook, butler and maid-of-all-work."

[Illustration: THE OUTSIDE OF TED'S HOUSE.]

"One would almost be inclined to think that such an experience, with
another year at bridge building, had been with certain 'practical
architects and builders' the entire course of study."

"It was plain enough," Jill continued, "that these houses were planned
by _men_, who were not only ignorant of the details of housework but
who held them in low esteem, as of no special importance. They
evidently exhausted their room and their resources on what they are
pleased to call the 'main' part of the house, leaving the kitchen and
all its accessories to be fashioned out of the chips and fragments that
remained. It would be a similar thing if a man should build a factory,
fill it with machinery, furnish and equip the offices, warerooms and
shipping docks, but leave no room for the engine that is to drive the
whole or for the fuel that feeds the engine. When 'we women' practice
domestic architecture, as we surely ought and shall,--"

"When it's fashionable."

"--we shall change all that. If there can be but two good rooms in a
house it is better to have a kitchen and sitting-room than a
dining-room and parlor. I propose to begin at the other end of the
problem in planning our house. It may not suit anybody else, but if it
suits Jack and I it will be a model home."

"That sentiment is a solid foundation to build upon," said the
architect. "I wish it was more popular. Build to suit yourselves, not
your neighbors."

"And now if you will walk into my kitchen, which is _not_ up nor down a
winding stair? but on the same level with the dining-room, you shall
judge whether it can be made a stern reality or must always remain the
ghostly wing of a castle in the air. The approach from outside is
through the little entry at the farther corner, where 'the butcher, the
baker, and the candlestick maker,' the grocer, the fish-man, the
milk-man and the ice-man bring their offerings. The other entrance is
by way of the lobby adjoining the main staircase hall. This lobby or
'garden entrance' is a sort of Mugby Junction, where we can take the
cars for the cellar, for the second floor by the back stairs route, for
the dining-room or for out of doors, and where we find refreshment in
the way of a wash-basin and minor toilet conveniences. Under the main
staircase there is also a large closet opening into this same lobby. My
kitchen you see has windows at opposite sides, not only to admit plenty
of light, for cleanliness is a child of light--"

"That's true," said Jack. "In a dark room it's hard to tell a dried
blueberry from a dried--currant."

"Not only for light, but that the summer breezes may sweep through it
when the windows are open, and, as far as possible, keep a river of
fresh air rollings between the cooking range and the dining-room. It is
long and narrow, that it may have ample wall space and yet keep the
distance between the engine and machine shop, that is, the range with
its appurtenances, and the packing-room--I mean the butler's pantry--as
short as possible."

"I'm glad there's going to be a 'butler's pantry,' it sounds so
stylish. I notice that among people who have accommodations for a
'butler' in their house plans, about one in a hundred keeps the
genuine article. All the rest keep a waitress or a 'second girl.'
Sometimes the cook, waitress, butler, chambermaid, valet and
housekeeper are all combined in one tough and versatile handmaiden."

[Illustration: JILL'S KITCHEN IN BLACK AND WHITE.]

"Well, call it china closet, though it is really something more than
that, or serving-room, or dining-room pantry--whatever you please. We
shall keep two servants in the house, one of whom will wait on the
table; consequently I do not want a door from this room-of-many-names
to the kitchen. It is much easier to maintain the dignity and order
that belong to our precious pottery, our blue and crackled ware, our
fair and frail cut glass, if they are not exposed to frequent attacks
from the kitchen side. There is, however, an ample sliding door or
window in the partition, and a wide serving table before it, on which
the cook will deposit the dinner as she takes it from the range. A part
of the top of this table is of slate, and may be kept hot by steam or
hot water from the range. With but one servant it would of course be
necessary to make the route from the kitchen range to the dining-room
table more direct."

"What if you had none?"

"If I had none, my kitchen, dining-room, store-room, china-closet,
butler's pantry and all the blessed facilities for cooking, serving and
removing the meals should be within a radius of ten feet. How any
mortal woman with a soul above dress trimmings can be content to spend
three hours in preparing meals to be eaten in thirty minutes passes my
comprehension. When I 'do my own work,' as Aunt Jerusha says, there
will be no extra steps, no extra dishes, no French cooking, no
multiplying of 'courses.'"

"No cards, no cake, no style."

"Yes, indeed! The most distinguished and elegant style. Such style as
is not possible except where all the household service is performed by
the most devoted, the most thoughtful, the most intelligent, if I may
say so--"

"Certainly the most intelligent, amiable, accomplished and altogether
lovely member of the family. I agree to that."

"There will be no _pretense_ of style--if that is what you mean, no
vain endeavor to conceal poverty or ignorance, but a delightful
Arcadian candor and simplicity that will leave the mistress of the
house, who is also housekeeper, nurse, cook, dairymaid, butler,
waitress, laundress, seamstress, governess and family physician,
abundant time and strength for such other occupations and amusements as
may be most congenial. It would be a delightful way of living, and I
should not hesitate to try it if I felt certain that I _had_ a soul
above dress trimmings. I am not willing to be a household drudge,
overwhelmed by the 'work that is never done;' therefore, to be on the
safe side, we will keep two servants.

"The cooking range, whether of the portable or 'set' kind, will have a
brick wall behind it and at each side, which, carried above, will form
a sort of canopy to conduct into the chimney the superfluous heat in
warm weather and the steam and smoke from cooking at all times. I
suppose some housekeepers would object to separating the two pantries,
but they have no common interests requiring close proximity. The
kitchen pantry is a store-room and a kind of private laboratory, where
the mysterious experiments are made that develop our taste for esthetic
cooking and give us an experimental knowledge of dyspepsia. Its
operations precede the work of the range to which it is a near
neighbor, as it ought to be. It has also the merit of being in the cool
northwest corner of the house, with small windows on two adjacent
sides, which are better than a single window, for the air of a
store-room or pantry cannot be changed too freely in warm weather.

"Do you see the closets at the end of this pantry? One is for ice,
which is shoved in through a little door just above the sink where it
is brought by the ice-man; the other is for a cold closet and is built
in such a way as to get the full benefit of its cold-blooded neighbor.
Don't forget, in making the plan, that the door through which the ice
slides must be large enough to take in the largest cakes, and must be
so arranged that after being washed at the sink they will slide easily
without lifting or _banging_ into their proper places inside."

"And let me suggest," said the architect, "that the waste-pipe that
carries off the melted ice be allowed to run straight out of doors,
without making the acquaintance of the sewer or any other drain-pipe."

"Please remember that then, as well as the door. The kitchen sink is at
the west end of the room, between and under two windows, which must be
at least three feet from the floor. It is near to the pantry door, to
accommodate the dishes used in cooking; yet not so near that one cannot
stand beside it without danger of being roasted or broiled; near to the
cellar door, from whence come the Murphys and other vegetables to have
their faces washed and their eyes put out. Of course there is a china
sink in the china closet, to insure tender treatment for all the table
ware, and I should like a sort of window or slide behind the sideboard
opening through it. Sometimes it will be convenient for the waitress to
arrange the articles to be used on the table within reach from the
dining-room side, and save a special journey whenever a dish, or a
spoon is changed."

"It strikes me," said Jack, "that when it comes to spoons you're
drawing it pretty fine. I suppose these are modern improvements, but
how much better will the dinners be than the dinners cooked in my
kitchen? Two servants will do all the work for the same wages."

"Real labor-saving is a religious duty, like all other economy; and if
we don't have better domestic service with better facilities for doing
work the fault is our own."

"But I don't see that this kitchen is any better than mine."

"Of course you don't; you're a man; but for one thing, your china
closet hasn't even a window of its own. How do you expect glasses to be
made clean and silver bright in such a place? Now observe my plan: Not
only is the kitchen light, but the entry where the ice comes in, the
pantry where the food is prepared, the butler's pantry, the stairs to
the cellar and to the second floor, and Mugby Junction, are all light.
There isn't a dark corner on the premises, and consequently no excuse
for uncleanness or accidents."

"Just think of the flies."

"Windows are easily darkened. But I am not quite ready to talk over
these minor matters. The general plan is the first thing, and I think
you will agree with me that it is well begun."

"According to Poor Richard, then, it is half done. So it's time for
recess."

"Very well; way of change let us look at the plans of brother Ted's
house in Kansas. Its situation is different from ours, as it stands on
a high bluff in a bend of the Missouri, and the parlor looks over the
water in three different directions, up and down and across the river.
The piazza seems to be arranged to make the most of this situation, and
Ted thinks it impossible to contrive a more charming arrangement for
hall, parlor and dining-room. They use the parlor as a common
sitting-room, and the hall still more commonly, especially in warm
weather. Ted doesn't realize that half the charm of the house lies in
its adaptation to the site."

[Illustration: THE FIRST FLOOR OF TED'S HOUSE.]

"That ought to be the case with every country or suburban house."

"It certainly will not fit our lot, and it seems to me best suited for
a summer home or for a warm climate."

Here Jack was called to his office, and Jill withdrew to attend to some
household duties, first requesting the architect to redraw the plans so
as to show accurately the construction and details.

"That is to say," said Jack, "while Jill makes a pudding for dinner and
I write a business letter of three lines, you are to lay out in
complete shape the plans for a house containing all the modern
abominations and improvements, that will cost ten thousand dollars,
occupy two years in building and last forever. That's a modest
request."

"Not extravagant compared with the demands often made upon domestic
architects, for it involves no downright contradictions. I am not asked
to show how a house worth ten thousand dollars can be built for five,
or to break the Golden Rule, or to change the multiplication table and
the cardinal points of the compass."




CHAPTER VII.

BE HONEST AND KEEP WARM.


The architect went home to translate the instructions he had received
into the language that builders understand. Jack and Jill established
themselves in the house that Jack built. The proposed amendments were
indefinitely postponed; Jill having consented to take the house
temporarily as she had taken Jack permanently--for better or
worse--only claiming her reserved right, in the case of the house, of
privately finding all the fault she pleased. Even the staircase, so
favorable to a swift descent, remained unchanged, and in their own room
the bed stood squarely in the middle of the floor. Jack averred that
this was intended when the house was planned, because the air is so
much better in the centre of a room, and there is not so much danger of
being struck by lightning.

One day there came a cold, gloomy rain on the wings of a raw east wind,
and after Jack had gone to his office it occurred to Jill that a fire
on the hearth in the parlor, which they used as a common sitting-room,
would be exceedingly comfortable, but on removing a highly ornamental
screen that served as a "fireboard," she found neither grate nor
fireplace, only a blank wall plastered and papered. Her righteous
wrath was kindled, not because she was compelled to get warm in some
other way, but by the fraudulent character of the chimney-piece. "I can
imagine nothing more absurdly impertinent," she declared to Jack when
he came home, "than that huge marble mantel standing stupidly against
the wall where there isn't even a chimney for a background. As a piece
of furniture it is superfluous; as a wall decoration it is hideous; as
a shelf it is preposterous; as a fireplace it is a downright lie. If
our architect suggests anything of the kind he will be dismissed on the
instant."

[Illustration: THE POOR BUT MODEST ATTORNEY'S COTTAGE]

"Don't you think the room would look rather bare without a mantel? You
know it's the most common thing in the world to have them like this. I
can show you a hundred without going out of town."

"Common! It's worse than common; it is vulgar, it is atrocious, it is
the sum of all villainies!" said Jill, her indignation rising with each
succeeding epithet. "A fireplace is a sacred thing. To pretend to have
one when you have not is like pretending to be pious when you know you
are wicked; it is stealing the livery of a warm, gracious, kindly
hospitality to serve you in making a cold, heartless _pretense_ of
welcome."

"I didn't mean to do anything wrong," Jack protested with exceeding
meekness. "Such mantels were all the fashion when this house was built,
and fashions in marble can't be changed as easily as fashions in paper
flowers."

"There ought not to be 'fashions' in marble, but of course it was
fashion. Nothing else than the blindest of all blind guides could have
led people into anything so hopelessly silly and unprincipled. I shall
never enjoy this room again," she continued, "knowing, as well I know,
that yonder stately piece of sculpture is a whited sepulchre, a
delusion and a snare. I shall feel that I ought to unmask it the moment
a visitor comes in, lest I should be asked to make a fire on the hearth
and be obliged to confess the depravity in our own household."

[Illustration: A DOUBLE TEAM.]

"Now, really, my dear, don't you think you are coming it rather strong,
if I may be allowed the expression? Isn't it possible that your present
views may be slightly tinged by the color of the east wind, so to
speak?"

"Not in the least. You know perfectly well, Jack, that insincerity is
the bane of domestic and social life; that hypocrisy is a child of the
Evil One, and that vain and false pretensions are the fatal lures that
lead us on to destruction. How can we respect ourselves or expect our
friends to respect us if the most conspicuous thing in the house is a
palpable fraud?"

"Very well, dear, I'll bring up a can of nitro-glycerine to-morrow and
blow the whole establishment into the middle of futurity. Meanwhile,
let us see if anything can be done to make it endurable a few hours
longer."

Dropping on his knees in front of the fictitious fireplace, Jack pulled
the paper from the wall, disclosing a sheet-iron stove-pipe receiver,
set there for a time of need, and communicating in some mysterious way
with a sooty smoke flue. Having found this, he telephoned to the stove
store for a portable grate--that is to say, a Franklin stove with
ornamental tiles in the face of it--and in less than an hour the room
was radiant with the blaze of a hickory fire, while a hitherto unknown
warmth came to the lifeless marble from its new neighbor. By sitting
directly in front of it Jill discovered that in appearance the general
effect was nearly as good as that of a genuine fireplace, the warmth
diffused being decidedly greater.

"I'm sorry I lost my temper," said she, after they had sat a while in
silence enjoying the ameliorating influence of the blaze, "but I _do_
hate a humbug. We will let this stove stand here all summer to remind
you that neither your house nor your wife is perfect, and to keep me
warm when the east wind blows."

[Illustration: WARMTH UNDER THE WINDOW.]

Jack's response to this magnanimous remark must be omitted, as it had
no direct bearing upon house-building.

"When I went into the kitchen this morning to get warm," Jill observed
later in the evening, "I found Bridget ironing; the stove was red-hot,
the bath boiler was bubbling and shaking with the imprisoned steam, and
the outside door was wide open. It struck me that there was heat enough
going out of doors, not to mention the superheated air of the kitchen
itself, to have made the whole house comfortable such days as this, if
it could only be saved. Don't you think it would be possible to attach
a pipe to some part of the cooking-range that would carry steam or hot
water to the front of the house. We shouldn't want it when the furnace
was running, nor in very warm weather, and at such times it could be
turned off."

Jack thought it could be done, and expressed a willingness to be a
roasted martyr occasionally if he could by that means make some use of
the perennial fire in the kitchen, a fire that seemed to be the hottest
when there was no demand for it.

[Illustration: STEAM PIPES BESIDE THE FIREPLACE.]

"It's my conviction," said he, "that if the heat actually evolved from
the fuel consumed by the average cook could be conserved on strictly
scientific principles, it would warm the house comfortably the year
round without any damage to the cooking, and with a saving of all the
bother of stoves, fireplaces and furnaces." And his conviction was well
founded, provided the house is not too large and the weather is not too
cold. "Shall we try it in the new house?"

"No, not unless somebody invents a new patent low-pressure,
automatic-cooking-range-warming-attachment before we are ready for it.
We shall have fireplaces in every room--real ones--and steam radiators
beside."

"What! in every room, those ugly, black, bronzy, oily, noisy, leaking,
sizzling, snapping steam radiators that are always in the way and keep
the air in the room so dry that everybody has catarrh, the doors won't
latch, and the furniture falls to pieces? You know how the old heirloom
mahogany chair collapsed under Madam Abigail at Mrs. Hunter's
party--went to pieces in a twinkling like the one-horse shay--and all
on account of the steam heat."

"Yes, I remember; it was a comical tragedy; and before we run any such
risks let us look over our advisory letters. Here's one from Uncle
Harry, who, as you know, is never without a hobby of some sort. Just at
present he is devoted to sanitary questions. To be well warmed,
ventilated and plumbed is the chief end of man. He begins by saying
that 'sun's heat is the only external warmth that is natural or
beneficial to human beings. When men have risen above the dark clouds
of sin and ignorance they will discover how to preserve the extra
warmth of the torrid zone and of the hot summers in our own latitudes
to be evenly diffused through colder climes and seasons. Next to sun's
heat is that which comes from visible combustion--the burning of wood
and coal. Such spontaneous, radiant, living warmth differs essentially
from that which we receive by contact with artificially-warmed
substances, somewhat as fruit that has been long gathered differs from
that taken directly from the vine.'"

"Isn't this getting sort of misty, what you might call 'transcendental
like'?"

"Possibly, and this is still more so: 'Warmth is the vital atmosphere
of life, and a living flame imparts to us some of nature's own
mysterious vitality. Hence, the sun's rays and the blaze of burning
fuel give not only a material but a spiritual comfort and cheer, which
mere warm air is powerless to impart. Here is another reason why direct
radiation, even from a black iron pipe, is preferable to a current of
warm air brought from a distance: in a room warmed by such a current
nothing is ever quite so warm as the air itself unless so situated as
to obstruct its flow, but every solid substance near a hot stove or
radiator absorbs the radiated heat and is satisfied, while the air for
respiration remains at a comparatively low temperature.'"

"There may be a little sense in that," said Jack, "but the rest is
several fathoms too deep for me. Has he any practical advice to give?"

"That depends upon what you call practical. 'I have little patience,'
he says, 'with the common objection to direct radiation, that it brings
no fresh air. Fresh air can be had for the asking under a small stove
or radiator standing in a room as well as under a large stove or boiler
standing in the cellar; neither does the dampness or dryness of the
atmosphere depend primarily upon the mode of warming it, while, as for
the appearance of steam pipes, if they are not beautiful as usually
seen, it only proves that art is not wisely applied to iron work, and
that architects have not learned the essential lesson that whatever
gives added comfort to a house will, if rightly treated, enhance its
beauty. Steam-pipes or radiators may stand under windows, behind an
open screen or grill of polished brass, or they may be incorporated
with the chimney piece, and need not, in either case, be unsightly or
liable to work mischief upon the carpets or ceilings under them.
Wherever placed, a flue to bring in fresh air should be provided and
fitted with a damper to control the currents.'"

"I like the notion of putting them beside the fireplace," said Jack.
"When they are both running, it would be like hitching a pair of horses
before an ox-team or a steam engine attachment to an overshot
water-wheel. It means business. Uncle Harry improves. What next?"

"He expounds his theories of light and shade, of plumbing, sewer-gas
and malaria, and casually remarks that 'the variation of the north
magnetic pole and the points of compass are not yet fully understood in
their relation to human welfare.'"

"I should hope not! He must be writing under the influence of a full
moon. Let us try a fresh correspondent."

"Very well. Here is Aunt Melville's latest, with a new set of plans.
There will be neither trancendentalism nor vain repetitions here:

    "'MY DEAR NIECE: Since writing you last I have had a most
    interesting experience, and hasten to give you the benefit of
    it. You remember Mr. Melville's niece married a young attorney
    in Tumbledonville; very talented and of good family, but poor,
    _desperately_ poor. He hadn't over two or three thousand
    dollars in the world, but he has built a marvelous little
    house, of which I send you the plans. You enter a lovely hall,
    positively larger than, mine, an actual room in fact, with a
    staircase running up at one side and a charming fireplace at
    the right, built, if you will believe it, of common red bricks
    that cost only five dollars a thousand. It couldn't have taken
    over two hundred and fifty to build it.--'

[Illustration: THE ATTORNEY'S FLOOR PLAN.]

"Just think of that! A charming fireplace for a dollar and a
quarter!--"

    "Communicating with the hall by a wide door beautifully draped
    with some astonishingly cheap material is the parlor, fully
    equal in every respect to my library, and adjoining that the
    dining-room, nearly as large. On the same side is a green-house
    between two bay windows, the whole arrangement having a
    wonderful air of gentility and culture. I am convinced that you
    ought to invest three-fourths of your father's wedding present
    in some safe business, and with the remainder build a house
    like this, buying a small lot for it, and defer the larger
    house for a few years. Keeping house alone with Jack and
    perhaps one maid-of-all-work will be perfectly respectable and
    dignified; the experience will do you good, and I have no doubt
    you will enjoy it. It will not only be a great economy in a
    pecuniary way, but society is very exacting, and a large house
    entails heavy social burdens which you will escape while living
    in a cottage. This will give you plenty of time to improve your
    taste in art, which is indispensable at present. There will be
    great economy, too, in the matter of furniture. A large house
    _must_ be furnished according to prevailing fashions, but in a
    small one you may indulge any unconventional, artistic fancy
    you please.'"

"If Aunt Melville's advice and plans could be applied where they are
needed they would be extremely valuable. Suppose we found a society and
present them to it for gratuitous distribution."

"We can't spare them yet; we shall not use them, but it is well to hear
all sides of a question."




CHAPTER VII.

TRUTH, POETRY AND ROOFS.


"How the wind does blow!" said Jill, as she laid aside Aunt Melville's
latest, and Jack laid another log into the open stove. "It is a genuine
'gale from the northeast.'"

"So it is, and that reminds me," Jack exclaimed, jumping up, "that a
driving rain from the northeast always gets the better of the attic
window over the guest-room. There's something mysterious about that
window," he explained. "It opens like a door; I believe they call it a
'casement' window, and in such a storm as this I have to keep sopping
up the water that blows in. I had a carpenter look at it, but he said
it couldn't be fixed without making a new one or fastening it up so it
couldn't be opened at all. We don't have a northeast rain-storm very
often, and that's the only window that ever leaks--except the skylight
and the round one in the west gable which is hung at the top to swing
inward and couldn't be expected to hold water."

Jill found some towels, and they hurried to the attic to "sop up" the
rain that was driving under the sash and had already made its mark on
the ceiling below. Then they examined the skylight and the round
window, and just as they were about to descend perceived a smell of
burning wood. Jack rushed down to the sitting-room, telling Jill to fly
for a pail of water, found the wall beside the stove-pipe very hot, ran
for an axe, and, smashing a hole through the lath and plastering,
discovered a bit of wood furring to which the laths had been nailed
resting directly against the sheet iron pipe. Catching the pail of
water which Jill was about to pour into the stove, he cooled the hot
pipe and extinguished the wood about to burst into flame, the smoke of
which, rising beside the chimney to the attic, had warned them of the
danger below. He then cut away around the pipe till the solid brick
chimney was exposed, gathered up the rubbish, piling the chips upon the
fire in the stove, and lay back in his chair, evidently enjoying the
situation.

"How can you be so reckless, Jack, as to keep a fire in such a
chimney?"

"The chimneys are all right, my dear. I took special pains with them
when the house was built. The only danger there ever was lay in that
little piece of inch board that happened to be too near the pipe."

"And how are we to know what other little pieces of board may be too
near? I think it's a very dangerous house to live in. If we hadn't gone
up to the attic when we did it would have been all in flames."

"And we shouldn't have gone to the attic at all if my windows had been
proof against the east wind."

"No, nor would you have known we were having a gale from the northeast
if I hadn't quoted the 'Wreck of the Hesperus.'"

[Illustration: NO CONCEALMENT OR DISGUISE.]

"Consequently we owe our preservation to the well-beloved poet."

"Moral: Study the poets."

"Moral number two: Build leaky casements."

"Number three: When the wood around a chimney takes fire it doesn't
prove a 'defective flue.'"

"Number four: A small fault hidden is more dangerous than a large one
in sight."

"Very true; and if modern builders had kept to the poet's standard,
and, like those in the elder days of art,

     'wrought with greatest care,
     Each minute and hidden part,'

we should not be trembling before a black and ragged chasm in the wall,
afraid to go to bed lest the fire should break out anew and burn us in
our sleep."

"There's not the least danger. We are as safe as a barrel of gunpowder
in a mill pond. There is nothing to set us on fire. That bit of dry
wood was the key to the whole situation. We have captured that and can
make our own terms. Still, if you feel nervous we will sit up and 'talk
house' till the fire goes out."

Jill acceded to this proposal and began to discourse, taking moral
number four for a text.

"I wish it were possible," said she, "to build a house with everything
in plain sight, the chimneys, the hot-air pipes from the furnace, if
there are any, the steam pipes, the ventilators, the gas pipes, the
water pipes, the speaking tubes, the cranks and wires for the
bells--whatever really belongs to the building. They might all be
decorated if that would make them more interesting, but even if they
were quite unadorned they ought not to be ugly. If we could see them we
shouldn't feel that we are surrounded by hidden mysteries liable at any
time to explode or break loose upon us unawares. Those things that get
out of order easily ought surely to be accessible. I don't believe
there would have been half the trouble with plumbing, either in the way
of danger to health or from dishonest and ignorant work, if it had not
been the custom to keep it as much as possible out of sight. There is a
great satisfaction, too, in knowing that everything is genuine."

"We might build a log house. The logs are solid, and the chimney, if
there happens to be one, won't pretend to be of the same material as
the walls of the building."

"I like better the notion of letting the material of which brick walls
and partitions are composed form the actual finish inside as well as
outside. The floors, too, should be bare, and the beams that support
them ought to be visible, and in case of a wooden house, the posts,
braces and other timbers should be left in sight when the building is
finished. It is a sad pity that modern modes of building, like modern
manners and fashions, conceal actual construction and character, making
a mask that may hide great excellence or absolute worthlessness."

"Won't all these pipes, wooden beams, bell ropes and things be
fearfully dusty and cumber the housekeeper with too much serving? I
supposed you would vote for smooth, flat, hard wood and painted walls,
they are so much easier to keep clean."

"Perhaps I shall; but we must remember the gnat and the camel and try
to be consistent. A single portière, especially if it be of the
rag-carpet style, has a greater dust-collecting capacity than a whole
houseful of wooden floors, ceilings and wainscots, even when they are
moulded and ornamentally wrought. Surely they will not be troublesome
if they are plain and simple, and only think how much more interesting
than flat square walls and ceilings, which we feel compelled to cover
with some sort of decoration to make them endurable. I suppose
architects have outgrown the sheet-iron and stucco style of building,
and do not generally approve of 'graining' honest pine in imitation of
coarse-grained chestnut. But these are not the only concealments and
disguises that ought to be reformed. If we cannot make our house a
model in any other respect, I hope it will be free from hypocrisy and
silly affectations."

"By all means; but you mustn't forget that reformers risk martyrdom.
However, you can't be too honest for me; I am ready to sign any pledge
you offer, even though it prohibit paint, putty and all other cloaks
for poverty, ignorance and dishonesty."

"There's a time and place for paint and putty, lath, plaster and paper,
but we ought not to be helplessly dependent upon them."

"Have you any idea how the house will look outside," asked Jack, giving
the fire a poke, "or is that to be left to take care of itself?"

"No, indeed! not left to take care of itself. In that part of the
undertaking we are bound to believe that the architect is wiser than
we, and must accept in all humility what he decrees. Still I think the
law of domestic architecture at least should be 'from within out.' For
the sake of the external appearance it ought not to be necessary to
make the rooms higher or lower than we want them for use, neither
larger nor more irregular in shape. It ought not to be necessary to
build crooked chimneys for the sake of a dignified standing on the
roof, or to make a pretense of a window where none is needed. The
windows are for you and me to look out from and to let in the sunlight,
not for the benefit of outside observers, and should be treated
accordingly. We will not have big posts--mullions, do you call
them?--in the middle of them, as there are in these. When I try to look
down the street to see if you are coming home I can scarcely see
obliquely to the corner of the lot, and we don't get half as much
sunshine as we should if the windows were all in one."

[Illustration: WITH A MULLION AND WITHOUT.]

"Why not, if there's the same amount of glass?"

"Because the sun can't shine around a corner; and Jack, why did you set
them so near the floor? There's no chance for a seat under them, and
they do not give as much light or ventilation as they would if they ran
nearly up to the ceiling."

"What is the use of making them long at the top? They are always half
covered up with lambrequins or some fanciful contrivance."

"Indeed, they will not be; our windows will be arranged to be wholly
uncovered whenever we need the light. Too many windows are not so
unmanageable as too many doors, and I should like one room with a whole
broadside of glass; but for most rooms the fewer windows the better,
provided they are broad and high. I despise a room in which you can't
sit down without being in front of a window or walk around without
running against a door, that has no large wall spaces for pictures and
no room for a piano, a book-case, a cabinet or a large lounge. A small
room, that has doors or windows on all sides does not seem like a room
intended for permanent occupation, but rather as a sort of outer court
or vestibule belonging to something farther on."

"I suppose the architect will claim the porches, balconies, and things
of that sort, as belonging to the exterior, and design them as he
pleases; but I think we have a right to insist that they shall add to
our comfort. They must be large enough to be used, they must be put
where we can use them conveniently, and they must not interfere with
the interior arrangements; beyond that we shall accept what the
architect sets before us."

"'Asking no questions for conscience sake.' How about the roof--is that
also a matter of evolution?"

"No; because the inside of the roof is of but little consequence. It
must keep out the rain and wind, snow and ice; it must be strong and
economically built and have a reasonable amount of light. The rest we
shall leave to the architect. As Uncle Harry observes, 'the material
part of the house rests upon the foundation stones; its spiritual
character is displayed chiefly in the roof, which may change to an
unlimited extent the expression of the building it covers.'"

[Illustration: JACK'S ARCHITECTURAL PHRENOLOGY.]

"That's so. Let me make the roofs for a people and I care not who
builds the houses. The roof on the house is like the hat on the man, as
I can show you," said Jack, taking a piece of charcoal from the stove
and drawing on the back of the fireboard some astonishing illustrations
of his theory.

"Here is the president of a big corporation who must be dignified
whether he has a soul or not. He represents the 'renaissance.' No
nonsense about him, no sentiment, no sympathy, no anything but--himself
and his own magnificence."

"This fellow is a brakeman--prompt, efficient, laconic. Same head, you
see, but different hat. He stands for the hipped roof which has one
duty to do and does it."

[Illustration: THE HAT MAKES THE MAN.]

"Give the dignified president a smashing blow on the head and you see
what he may become after an unsuccessful defalcation--an unfortunate
tramp, who has 'seen better days.' He is a capital illustration of the
roofs called 'French,' that were so imposing a few years ago, and are
about as agreeable in the way of landscape decoration as the tramp
himself, but not half so picturesque.

"Pull the string again and we have a benevolent 'broad-brim,' stiff,
symmetrical and proper to the last degree, like an Italian villa; and,
once more changing the straight lines to crooked ones, the conventional
formalist becomes the unconventional, free-and-easy South-westerner,
who may stand for Swiss or any other go-as-you-please style."

"It is midnight and the fire is out; let's adjourn."

[Illustration.]




CHAPTER IX.

PROFESSIONAL ETIQUETTE--BLINDS AND BESSIE.


The next demonstration from the architect was a pencil drawing of the
floor plans, submitted for inspection and criticism. Concerning these
he wrote to Jill's entire satisfaction. "From many of my clients I
should expect the first question would be, 'Will a house built in this
shape look well outside?' It is not necessary to remind you that at
this stage of the proceedings such an inquiry is wholly irrelevant. The
interior arrangements should be made without a thought of the exterior
effect, precisely as if the house were to wear the ring of Gyges and be
forever invisible to outsiders. There are several points, however, on
which I await further instructions----"

"What's the use of having an architect," Jack inquired, "if you've got
to keep instructing him all the time?"

----"provided you wish to give instructions," Jill continued reading.
"There is often a misunderstanding between architect and client, and I
wish to avoid it in the present case by saying at the outset that while
there are many things which, in my opinion, should be referred to you,
I am ready to decide them for you if you wish me to do so; but even in
such cases I prefer to set before you the arguments pro and con, after
which, if you still desire it, I shall accept the arbitration. This is
not a rule that works both ways or applies universally, for while
referring to you matters relating to use and expenditure, and at the
same time standing ready to decide them for you, I cannot promise to
accept your advice in matters of construction and design. I trust I
have not yet reached the fossiliferous state of mind that prevents my
listening with sincere respect to candid suggestions, even from those
who are not fairly competent to give advice; but on these points you
must not expect me to follow your taste and judgment in opposition to
my own, even if you do pay the bills. When your physician prescribes
arsenic and you inform him that you shall give it to your poodle and
take strychnine instead, he will doubtless infer that his services are
no longer desired; he will know that while he might be able to kill
you, he could not hope to cure you. Patients have rights that
physicians are bound to respect, but the right to commit suicide and
ruin the physician's reputation is not among them. The relations of
client and architect are similar.

"This is one of the questions which I refer to you, but will answer for
you if you send it back: How shall the eyes of the house be closed?
Shall the eyelids be outside blinds, inside folding shutters, 'Queen
Anne' rolling blinds, sliding blinds or Venetian shades? There are good
reasons for and against each kind; either, if adopted, compels some
compromise. Whichever road you take you will wish you had taken the
other.

[Illustration: THE CONTRIBUTION OF BESSIE'S FATHER.]

"For instance, in hot weather outside blinds that shield the glass
from the direct rays of the sun keep the rooms cooler than any form of
inside shutters; they allow a gradation of light and a free circulation
of air. You can even leave the window open during a summer shower
without danger of being drenched. Last but not least they are
inexpensive. The wrong side of the outside blinds appears when you wish
to make wide windows, or mullioned windows, or windows that cannot
command at each side an unobstructed wall space equal to at least half
their own width for the blinds to rest against when open. Under such
circumstances, which are by no means rare, outside blinds are
stubbornly unmanageable.

"Inside blinds that fold back and swing away from the windows must have
wide recessed jambs to hold them when they are not in use. If the
windows are broad these 'pockets' will require a thick wall and thus
increase the actual size of the house. A little space may be saved by
allowing them to stand out obliquely when open, or turn around upon the
inside face of the wall, but either mode increases the cost of
finishing the rooms. If these blinds are made of open slats, many
housekeepers despise them as being no better than small cabinets
maliciously contrived to accumulate dust; if of solid panels, they make
a room perfectly dark, or when opened ever so slightly admit unbroken
rays of sunlight. On the other hand, inside blinds are accessible; they
can be opened and closed without leaning half one's length out of the
window; they do not hide the glory of plate glass; they graciously
permit windows to stand where they please and to be as large as they
please; and they never quarrel with piazza roofs, awnings, hoods or
other outside accessories.

"Shutters that coil up into a box over the window or down into a box
below it have the modest excellence of being always out of the way when
they are not wanted, of staying where they are put when partially open,
of occupying but little space and never standing in the way of the
window curtains. They are, in fact, wooden shades similar to the
old-fashioned green slat curtains, that were rolled up by drawing a
cord, but are far more substantial. The single slats of which they are
composed do not revolve, and consequently it is not easy to 'peep
through the blind just to hear the band play.'

"Venetian shades, with their multiplicity of bright-colored straps,
cords, hooks and trimmings, are picturesque and graceful. They are
somewhat subject to dust and repairs, and when the window is open are
not proof against tornadoes and thunder showers.

"Inside blinds are sometimes contrived to slide sideways, like barn
doors, into cavities formed to receive them. If built with extreme care
and handled with the utmost tenderness they are a degree less obtrusive
than when wholly dependent on hinges. Likewise, outside blinds may be
contrived to swing horizontally as well as vertically, standing out
from the top of the window like a small shed roof. They are not quite
wide enough to serve as awnings, and are liable to catch more wind than
they can hold."

"It strikes me that the whole thing is a 'blind.' What is he driving
at?"

"The conclusion of the matter seems to be given in this sentence: 'You
will perceive, therefore, that a decision in regard to blinds should be
made even before the house is staked out, since the size of the
foundation itself may be affected by it, as well as the minor
details.'"

"I'm ready for the question; are you?"

"Yes. In the bay windows and for the long windows that give access to
the balconies and piazzas we will have blinds that roll up out of the
way. A few of the windows on the sunny side will have for summer use
outside blinds, a few more will have cloth awnings. The most of the
windows will have no blinds at all, only such shades and curtains as we
choose to furnish. I don't think the eyes of a house ought to be closed
much of the time. It is certainty absurd to hang blinds at all the
windows when we only need them at a few."

"Oh, but won't the neighbors rage and imagine vain things when they see
a house with here and there a blind and here and there an awning?"

"The wise ones will approve; the foolish ones will demonstrate their
folly by criticising what they don't understand."

"Very well, that point is settled. Unless the next is sharp and short
you must decide it without my help. It is high time I was at the
office."

"We will defer them all. It is time for me to be at my household
duties. You know Cousin Bessie comes this afternoon, and I've noticed
that extremely intellectual people are sometimes extremely fond of a
good dinner."

"If Bessie is coming I must anoint my beard with oil of sunflowers and
trot out my old gold slippers. Shall I send up some pale lilies for
dessert? And that reminds me--Jim came home last night and I asked the
old fellow to come up to dinner. How do you suppose Bess found it out?"

"Don't be spiteful, Jack. She didn't find it out at all. I invited her
a week ago. Now go to the office, please, while I put the house in
order."

During this important process Jill entertained herself by philosophical
reflection upon the style of living that requires a house to be
constantly "put in order." She recalled certain of Uncle Harry's
observations to the effect that in a truly civilized state housekeeping
would be so conducted and houses would be so contrived that instead of
causing care and labor proverbially endless, housekeepers would no more
be burdened by their domestic duties than are the fowls of the air.
Jill had too much of the rare good sense, incorrectly called "common,"
to attempt to reduce Uncle Harry's theories to practice all at once.
She knew that though we may not reach the summit of our ambition, it is
well to advance toward it even by a single step, or failing in that, to
help prepare a way for some one else. She understood the wisdom of
striving to increase the fraction of life by dividing the denominator,
and at the same time cherished the broader hope that her life and her
home might be filled with whatever is of most enduring worth.

Moralizing thus, but always with an architectural or house-building
background, she continued her work, noticing the sharp grooves and
projecting mouldings that caught the dust, the high, ugly thresholds,
the doors that swung the wrong way, compelling half a dozen extra steps
in passing through them; shelves that were too high or too narrow;
drawers that refused to "draw" or dropped helplessly on the floor as
soon as they were drawn out far enough to display the spoons and
spices they contained; window stools that came down behind tables and
shelves, forming a sort of receptacle for lost articles belonging to
the kitchen or pantry--all of which she resolved should not be
repeated. When Bessie arrived the house was in that most perfect order
which gives no sign of unusual preparation.

[Illustration: FIRST FLOOR OF THE CONTRIBUTION.]

"This is too perfectly lovely for anything," exclaimed Bessie. "I just
_dote_ on domestic duties. You can't help being overpoweringly happy,
Jill, with such a home and _such_ a husband. Then only to think of the
new house drives me completely frantic. What _will_ it be like? Are the
plans made? Oh! I do hope not, for I have a _million_ of things to tell
you about that are totally _unspeakable_."

"Then you are just in time. We had a long letter from the architect
this morning asking for instructions on various matters."

"How perfectly fascinating! Let's sit down this minute and begin upon
them."

But Jill preferred waiting till Jack came home, bringing with him his
younger brother, just home for summer vacation.

"It isn't necessary to announce dinner," said she. "The preliminary
odors have already advertised it through the entire house."

"I thought these observations were to be strictly confidential,"
observed Jack.

"That wasn't 'finding fault.' It was a mere casual remark. Some people
may think it pleasanter to be summoned by the odor of broiling fish
than by the noise of a dinner-bell."

"Indeed I do," said Bessie, taking Jack's proffered arm. "Odors are too
delicious for anything. They are so refined and spiritual I'm sure I
could live on them. I would far prefer the fragrance of a dish of
strawberries to the fruit itself."

"We shall get along capitally then. You can smell of the berries and
I'll eat them afterwards. You see now, Jill, the advantage of having a
house built like this. Cousin Bessie proposes that we live on the
fragrance of the food. It won't be necessary even to come to the
dining-room. We can all stay in the parlor or in our chambers and
absorb sustenance from the circumambient air, as the sprightly goldfish
gathers honey from the inside of a glass ball."

"Please don't make fun of me, Cousin Jack, for I do truly _revel_ in
fragrance, and I'm sure your house is _beautifully_ planned. Don't you
think so, Mr. James?"

"I realty don't know much about such things. I never did like to know
what I was going to have for dinner long beforehand--it makes me so
awfully hungry."

"Precisely so, Jim; it gives you am appetite. I had the house planned
in this way for that very purpose."

"Now that you have introduced the subject," said Jill, "I will tell you
how _I_ should have planned it. There should have been a 'cut-off'
somewhere--a little lobby between the kitchen and the rest of the
house, with a ventilating flue so large that neither smoke nor steam
nor perfumed air could pass it without being caught up and carried to
the sky. Of course these odors ought not to get away from the
ventilator above the range, but the best contrivances are not proof
against the carelessness of the cook when she is in a hurry--as she
always is just before dinner."

When they returned to the sitting-room Bessie brought down a set of
plans her father had sent for Jack and Jill to examine, thinking they
would suit their lot and taste. They did suit the lot fairly, but
Jill's mind was too fully made up to accept any change from her own
plan. The exterior she approved cordially, but to Bessie's despair
would not promise to imitate it, preferring to leave the outside to her
architect without reserve.

While they were spoiling their eyes in the twilight Jack pressed the
electric "button" that lighted the gas instantaneously all over the
house, causing Bessie to cry out in protest against such a sudden
transition. "It is so violent, so unlike the slow, sweet processes of
nature. I never shall learn to like gas, and the electric light is
absolutely _horrid_. Don't you love tapers, Mr. James?"

"Tapirs? I don't think I'm a judge; I never had one. I should rather
have a tame zebra."

"Oh, I mean tapers for light!"

"Excuse me--certainly: yes, that is, I think I do. We don't use them
very often. Do you mean tallow or wax?"

"Wax, of course! They have such elegant decorations on them. I had a
most exquisite sconce Christmas, with two of the loveliest tapers
completely covered with Moorish arabesques in crimson and old gold."

"What becomes of the decorations when the tapers burn up?"

"Well, we don't burn them much. Indeed, I don't think we ought to use
artificial light at all. The mysterious light of the moon and stars is
so much more enchanting. Don't you love to muse and dream in the fading
twilight?"

"No, not very well. The trouble is if I get to sleep before I go to bed
I don't sleep as well afterward."

"Oh, I don't mean actual dreams, but vague, dreamy musings, esthetic
aspirations and longings. Do you never long for abstract beauty?"

"Well, no, not long. If I can't get what I want pretty quick I
generally go for something else."

This irrelevant conversation was vastly entertaining to Jack, who,
knowing how unlike were the dispositions of his brother and his wife's
cousin, had contrived their meeting with special reference to his own
amusement. When the clock told the hour for retiring he brought Bessie
a tin candlestick, in which a tallow candle smoked and spluttered in a
feeble way, but filled the soul of the young lady with admiration, it
was so "full of feeling."

"Life is so much richer when our environment is illuminated and
glorified--"

"By tapers," said Jack as he bade her an affectionate good-night.




CHAPTER X.

MORE QUESTIONS OF FIRE AND WATER.


"We must devote this evening exclusively to the new house," said Jill,
as Jack started for his office. "The architect is waiting for
instructions, and every day we lose now will give us another day of
vexation and impatience when we are waiting for the house to be
finished."

"That's true, and it's a chronological fact that house-builders often
forget. Very well, I'll come home early. Will Bessie be here?"

"Certainly. She has come for a long visit."

"Then I shall bring up Jim again. One-half Bess says he can't
understand, and he doesn't approve of the other half; but we couldn't
keep him away if we tried. So we'll invite him to come. It's great fun
to hear Bessie's comments and witness Jim's helplessness."

"If you are going to devote yourself to Jim and Bessie," said Jill
severely, "I may as well answer these questions without consulting you
at all."

"Oh, pray don't do that. Give me a chance to express my opinions. Some
of them are strikingly bold and original. Besides, you will need me to
conduct the meeting."

It happened, accidentally of course, that Bessie's evening dress was of
a color that looked well by gaslight, and no objection was made to the
unnatural illumination.

Jill took up the architect's letter, where she had left it, at the
conclusion of the blind question. "Another point that was mentioned
when I was at your father's house must be decided soon: Shall there be
gutters to catch the water from the roof, with pipes of some sort to
convey it to the ground, or shall it be left to take care of itself? If
there are none, the ground around the house should pitch sharply away
from the walls and a slight depression should be formed, into which the
water would fall. This shallow ditch should be perhaps two feet wide,
as the drops will not always come down in straight lines. It may be
paved with small stones or bricks, between which the grass will grow,
or it maybe more carefully lined with asphalt paving. If it is desired
to conduct the water to a certain point, this drain can descend
slightly toward it, and, if the lawn will not be injured by an
occasional inundation, even the shallow ditch may be omitted, making
merely a one-sided slope, hardened to prevent the water from wearing a
ragged, unsightly channel around the house. The advantages of disposing
of the water in this way, dispensing with the gutters, are its economy
and its permanence. Whatever the material may be of which they are
made, gutters attached to the eaves or roof cause more or less trouble
and expense from the time they are put in place till the house is given
up to the owls and the bats. They are liable to be corroded by rust, to
be clogged with leaves and dust, to be choked with ice, or to become
loosened from their fastenings. If used at all, they should be frankly
acknowledged. This is not, however, a point on which I am in need of
instructions, but would remind you that one of the interesting
illustrations of the happy skill of the old masters in making a virtue
of necessity is found in the effective treatment of the waterspouts and
conductors. They made them bold, quaint and picturesque in appearance,
far removed from the tin contrivances that we hang in frail awkwardness
to our roofs."

[Illustration: A GARGOYLE]

"How perfectly delightful!" exclaimed Bessie. "Those horribly grotesque
old gargoyles are just glorious. Don't you delight in the antique, Mr.
James, when it isn't too horrible?"

"Yes, they are awfully jolly. We had a great time with them last
'Fourth.' I got myself up as a pirate king--black flag, skull and
cross-bones, you know. It was awfully jolly."

"I never saw any of that kind, but you _will_ have some gargoyles,
won't you, Jill?"

"Possibly, for the architect says' whether you have gutters entirely
around the house or not; it will doubtless be necessary to catch the
water that would fall upon the steps or balconies in short
eave-troughs, and as they are certain to be conspicuous they should be
respectfully treated. As they add to the comfort of the house they
should also add to its beauty.' Now what shall be said on this subject?
His opinion appears to be that if we do not need to save the water for
use, and if it will do no harm upon the ground around the house, it
will be best to omit them except where protection is needed for
something below. He sends some sketches and says 'they represent a few
of the methods by which the water may be caught and carried to the
ground. Number two and number three will prevent the sliding of the
snow from the roof, which is sometimes desirable, but not always.
Gutters made in this form should be so near the eaves that in case of
accidental injury the water could not find its way inside the main
walls. Number five has the advantage of leaving the house uninjured
whatever happens to the gutter itself. It may leak through its entire
length or run over on both sides without doing other harm than wasting
the water.' I don't see," said Jill, laying down the letter, "how we
can give instructions without dictating in matters of 'construction and
design,' concerning which the architect distinctly objects to advice."

[Illustration: A CHOICE OF GUTTERS.]

"Tell him we don't care what becomes of the water and the lawn will
take care of itself. Then 'instruct' him to exercise his own
discretion. That's what he is for. What next?"

"He would like to know our wishes in regard to fireplaces."

"I thought the heating question had been decided once according to
Uncle Harry's doctrines."

"Not fully. We shall have both steam and open fires; the architect
understands that, but he doesn't know how many fireplaces nor what
kind. We can tell him how many easily enough: one in each room of the
first story except the kitchen, but including the hall, and one in each
of the bed-rooms."

[Illustration: "A SIMPLE RECESS."]

"Including the guest chambers?"

"By all means. There is nothing that makes one feel so thoroughly
welcome, so delightfully at home as a room with an open fire. Mahogany
four-posters, velvet carpets and sumptuous fare are trivial compliments
in comparison. Concerning the style and cost he says: 'Of designs there
is an endless variety, and there is a wide range in cost, from the
simple recess in the side of a plain brick chimney'--"

"One of the kind that Aunt Melville builds for a dollar and a quarter."

"'--to the elaborate affairs that cost as much as a comfortable
cottage. It would be idle for me to attempt to give you a full
description of them all--my letter would appear like a manufacturer's
catalogue. Indeed, you can find whole books on the subject, large books
too, which it will be interesting and profitable for you to study; but
first it is necessary to lay out the chimneys to accommodate the sizes
and styles to be chosen. You will easily understand that a grate for
burning coal alone, especially hard coal, may be much smaller than a
fireplace to hold hickory logs that it takes two men to carry; but the
heat of anthracite coal would soon destroy the lining of a fireplace
adapted to an ordinary fire of wood. It cannot be necessary to remind
you that the best open fireplaces, whether for wood or coal, are those
which, instead of sending three-fourths of the heat up the chimney
flue, give it out from all sides, to be saved either directly or by
being conveyed to an adjoining or upper room. It is also possible to
make a fireplace that will accommodate either wood or coal, but like
all compromises this is attended with certain disadvantages. If large
enough for wood it is too large for hard coal. The smoke flue for a
coal fire may also be smaller, the hotter fire causing the stronger
draught. Coal ashes, too, ought to be dropped through the hearth into
ash pits below, even from the fires of the upper rooms. To "take up the
ashes" of a wood fire is not so troublesome. These are some of the
reasons why it is necessary to determine the kind and number of your
fireplaces before the plans of the chimneys are drawn.'"

[Illustration: IN THE MIDDLE RANK.]

"Why not make an appropriation of fifty dollars apiece for each grate,
mantel and hearth, and have him do the best he can with it?"

"We can fix that as an average price, but shall want some better than
others, and must mark in each room whether we wish to provide for wood,
for coal, or for both. That is, whether we want 'set' grates or open
fireplaces with andirons or something of that kind."

"Oh, do have andirons. _Please_ have andirons," said Bessie. "You know
you can go out into the country and buy them for old brass of the
farmers who haven't the remotest idea of their value. They keep them up
in those dear old musty garrets covered with dust and spider webs."

"Certainly, we will have a few andirons and several spinning-wheels and
moony clocks and solid old carved oak chests that for generations have
been full of moths and food for worms. I never happened to come across
one of those old bonanza garrets, but I suppose there are plenty of
them lying around and just running over with these antique treasures.
Jim, can't I hire you to go out among the unesthetic heathens and buy
up a few loads of heirlooms and other relics of former greatness? We
shall want some old associations in the new house, and if we haven't
any of our own we must buy some."

"I don't think I know much about such things. Why don't you go to a
furniture store and get what you want first-hand? Second-hand furniture
always looks shabby and out of date. However, if Miss Bessie could go
with me to pick out things, I wouldn't mind taking a drive into the
country to see what we could find."

[Illustration: THE WORTH OF A COSY COTTAGE.]

"Now, really, wouldn't you mind it? How enchanting! It will be
delightful to be associated with the new house. I know we shall find
some _lovely_ things."

"All right. You shall have Bob and the express wagon to-morrow. What
next, Jill?"

"'I should be glad to know your feeling in regard to height of rooms,
but shall not promise fully to agree with you. My purpose is to make
the principal rooms of the first story ten and a-half or eleven feet
high.'"

"Oh, how dreadful! I don't know how high eleven feet is, but I'm sure
they ought not to be more than seven feet."

"I thought you were going to say not less than fourteen," said Jim.

"Oh, no, indeed! Low rooms are so deliciously quaint and cosy."

"But I should be all the time expecting to hit my head."

"You wouldn't think of that for a moment if you could only feel the
influence of Kitty Kane's library. It is a copy of an old English
bar-room, or something of that sort, I don't exactly remember what, but
it is in the Queen Anne style, and it's too lovely for anything. Please
have low rooms, Jill."

Jill continued reading: "For rooms of ordinary sizes and devoted to
ordinary domestic purposes, that is high enough for use, for comfort
and for any reasonable amount of decoration, either upon the walls
themselves or in the shape of pictures or other ornaments. You will
certainly think it enough when you are climbing the stairs to the rooms
of the second story. It may be practicable to reduce the height of some
of the smaller apartments, but it is usually much more convenient to
keep the ceilings of the main rooms of uniform height, even if this
does upset the 'correct proportion' which critics attempt in vain to
establish. To make ceilings very low seems an affectation of humility
or of antiquity not justified by common sense. In the polar regions,
where the sun never reaches an altitude above twenty-three degrees, low
rooms and short windows would be entirely satisfactory. In the torrid
zone, where it is not safe to build more than one story for fear of
earthquakes and tornadoes, where chambers would be useless, and where
the grand question is not how to keep warm but how to keep cool, the
higher the better. For houses in the temperate zones the medium height
is the safest, the best--and the most _artistic_. If any one dares to
say it is not, ask him to tell you the reason why."

"How perfectly _exasperating_," said Bessie in a tragic aside to Jim.
"No one ought to try to give reasons in art, in religion or in
politics. Intuitions are so much more satisfactory. Don't you _always_
rely on your intuitions, Mr. James?"

"Perhaps I should if I had them, but somehow I--I never seem to have
any."

"The meeting appears to be divided," said Jack. "Bessie says seven, Jim
says fourteen. Suppose we split the difference and call it ten and a
half."

"That is, we advise the architect to do as he pleases, then he will be
sure to follow our advice."




CHAPTER XI.

WHAT SHALL WE STAND UPON?


"Splitting the difference" is a convenient compromise, but it is not
always creditable to both parties, and Jill thought it would not be
safe with such advisers to assume that Wisdom's house is always built
between two extremes. She felt, too, that the architect's discussion of
details must be tiresome to her guests, and therefore resolved to take
up but one more of his queries, spending the remainder of the evening
in looking over plans and letters, of which she had an ample store
still unexplored, or in listening to Bessie's ardent description of the
treasures she hoped to find in the lofty recesses of the old garrets.

"I fear the next topic will not be deeply interesting, but it is the
last one to-night, and Jack _must_ give me his undivided attention if
he wishes to know what we are to stand upon in the new house."

"Is it about floors?" Bessie asked. "Do please have waxed floors. I
dote on waxed floors, don't you, Mr. James?"

"Not especially; but I'm pretty apt to slip on them. _Is_ it about
floors, Jill?"

"Yes, but chiefly about the best way to build them--their
construction."

[Illustration: A PROMISE OF SOCIAL SUCCESS.]

"I thought the architect was to settle questions of construction to
suit himself."

"He is, and this topic he writes 'concerns construction, cost, use and
design, and is, therefore, one on which we may properly take counsel
together.'"

"How condescending!"

[Illustration: A REASONABLE HOPE.]

"I suppose you would object to iron girders with brick arches between
them on account of their cost, but I hope to see rolled iron beams for
brick dwelling-houses so cheaply made that they will be commonly used
instead of wood. Such iron ribs, with the brick arches or other masonry
between them, might well form the finish of the ceilings, and if we
were accustomed to see them, our frail lath and plaster would seem
stale, flat and combustible in comparison. The usual mode of making
floors of thin joists set edgewise, from one to two feet apart, with
one or two thicknesses of inch boards on the top to walk upon, and
lathing underneath to hold the plastering, is perhaps the most
economical use of materials. A more satisfactory construction would be
to use larger beams two or three times as far apart, laying thicker
planks upon them and dispensing with plastering altogether, or perhaps
applying it between the timbers directly to the under-side of the
planks, leaving the beams themselves in sight. If the floor is double
the planks or boards lying directly upon the joists may be of common,
coarse stock, hemlock or spruce, upon which must be laid another
thickness of finished boards. It is for you to say whether the finished
upper floor shall be of common, cheap stock, to be always covered by
carpets, or of some harder wood carefully polished and not concealed at
all, except by occasional rugs.'"

"Oh, I do _hope_ she will have rugs!" Bessie's remarks were semi-asides
addressed chiefly to Jim. "There's nothing so lovely as these oriental
rugs. Kitty Kane had an _exquisite_ one among her wedding presents, and
when her house was built the parlor was made to fit the rug. It makes
it rather long and narrow, but the rug is _too_ lovely."

"'It is also for you to say whether the finished floor, if you have no
carpets, shall consist simply of plain narrow boards or be more
expensively laid in parquetry designs. In the latter case I shall claim
the privilege of choosing the pattern.'"

"Why should he trouble himself about the pattern of the wood floors any
more than he would about the style of the carpets?"

"He would probably say, because the floors are a part of the house for
which he is making the plans and will last as long as the house itself,
while the carpets are subject to changing fashions and will soon return
to their original dust. But he may attempt to dictate in regard to
carpets if we give him a chance."

[Illustration: FLOORS AS THEY ARE.]

[Illustration: FLOORS AS THEY MIGHT BE.]

"Undoubtedly--to the extent of pitching them out of the window."

"In laying double floors one simple matter must not be neglected. The
under, or lining boards, which are usually wide and imperfectly
seasoned, should be laid _diagonally_ upon the joists; otherwise in
their shrinking and swelling they will move the narrow finished boards
resting upon them and cause ugly cracks to appear, even though the
upper floor is most carefully laid and thoroughly seasoned. The liberal
use of nails is another obvious but often neglected duty of
floor-makers, who seem, at times to act upon the supposition that as a
floor has nothing to do but lie still and be trodden upon, it only
needs to be laid in place and let alone. This may be true of stone
flagging; it is far from being true of inch boards, that have an
incurable tendency to warp, twist, spring and shake. Lining floors,
especially, whatever their thickness, should be nailed--spiked is a
more forcible term--to every possible bearing and with generous
frequency; to be specific, say every three inches. The finished hoards
must also be secured by nails driven squarely through them. If you
object to the appearance of nail heads the boards may be secured by
nails driven through the edges in such way that they will be out of
sight when the floor is finished; but this should never be done except
by skillful and conscientious workmen. There is no excuse for this
"blind" nailing in floors that are to be covered by carpets, and it is
seldom desirable under any circumstances. All thorough nailing adds
greatly to the strength, and will alone prevent the creaking of the
boards, so annoying in a sick room and so discouraging to burglars.'"

"Whatever else we do we must make it all right for the burglars. Tell
him we will have floors that can be used either way, with rugs or
without, with matting, with carpets, or with nothing at all but their
own unadorned loveliness. Those in the chambers, where there is not
much wear and tear, may be of common clear pine, and we can paint or
stain a border around the edges. The others ought to be of harder wood,
and, as they will last as long as we shall need floors, we can afford
to have them cost rather more than a good carpet, perhaps thirty or
forty cents a square foot."

"I don't see the necessity for that," said Jill, who had a frugal
mind--at times. "I know they will outlast a great many carpets, but it
is considerable work to keep a bare floor in order--or rather to put it
in order--which must be taken into account; and, as for saving the
expense of carpets, we shall be likely to spend twice as much for rugs
as the carpets would cost. However, extravagance in rugs is not the
fault of the hard-wood floors and ought not to be charged against them.
We might have a few parquetry floors, but for most of the rooms plain
narrow strips, with a pretty border, will be good enough. What do you
think about it, Jim?"

While Jim was preparing to say that he didn't think he knew much about
such things, there came a crash on the floor above, followed by loud
and incoherent observations by the chambermaid. The chandelier began to
shake, as that substantial domestic fairy flew through the passage that
led to the back stairs, at the head of which she was distinctly heard
to exhort the cook in good set terms to "hurry up with the mop, for the
water-jug was upset and the mistress would be raving if the water came
through the ceiling."

The quartette below listened with conflicting emotions. Jill was
indignant, Bessie horrified--apparently, Jim greatly amused, and Jack
sublimely indifferent. "If there's anything I _despise_," said Jill,
"it is a house that makes a human being seem like an elephant, and
where I can't say my prayers or move a chair in my own room without
rousing the entire household."

"There's one good thing about it," said Jim pleasantly. "You can't help
knowing what is going on in your own house."

"Spoken like a man and a brother, James. You always go to the root of a
matter. I like to keep posted. No skeletons and gunpowder plots for me.
I had this house made so on purpose." Whereat they all laughed and
again took up the floor question, while the sound of hurrying feet and
the rattling of domestic implements went on overhead, and the
chandelier trembled with the jarring floors.

"I suppose forty dollars' worth of timber originally added to these
floors would have made them so firm that we might drive a caravan
across them without shaking the building. We will, at least, have solid
floors in the new house; but the architect informs us that 'effectual
deafening of the floors and partitions necessarily adds considerably to
their cost, since the walls and ceilings must be virtually double or
filled with some light porous material. The construction I have
described for making the house fireproof, or nearly so, would also make
it comparatively sound-proof. It would prevent the passage of any
reasonable in-door noises, though it might not withstand the stamping
of heavy steel-shod feet. Indeed, the question of bare, hard-wood
floors is, in one of its aspects, rather a question of boots. It is
most unreasonable to say the floors are noisy and slippery when the
fault lies rather in the hard, stiff, awkward receptacles in which our
feet are imprisoned. If we are ever clad from head to foot in the robes
of a perfect civilization, we shall doubtless find smooth bare floors
for general use more satisfactory than any kind of rugs, mats or
carpets.'

"And now," said Jill, "we will leave the rest of this interminable
letter for a more convenient season and see what our indefatigable aunt
has sent as the latest and best thing in domestic architecture. If you
will take the plans and follow the description, I will read the letter
straight through, though it will doubtless contain more or less advice
not strictly pertinent to house-building. Here it is:

    "MY DEAR JILL: On further reflection I have concluded that the
    little cottage plans which I sent last will not answer. I doubt
    whether you and Jack have sufficient independence and
    originality to make a success of living; even temporarily, in a
    small, unpretending cottage. It requires unusual strength of
    character'--

"Listen, Jack.

    --to establish and maintain a high social standing with no
    adventitious aids. You cannot at present afford a large
    establishment, but you must have one that is striking and
    elegant. I was first attracted to this house by its external
    appearance--not especially the form, but the material, as we
    often see a lady of inferior _physique_ whose rich and tasteful
    attire makes her the observed of all observers."

[Illustration: BRICKS AND BOULDERS ON GRANITE UNDERPINNING.]

"Aunt Melville is inclined to be dumpy, and is immensely proud of her
taste in dress.

    "'The walls near the ground--the underpinning, I suppose--is of
    solid granite blocks, irregular in size, rough and rugged in
    appearance. Indeed, the impression is of exceeding solidity and
    strength, perhaps because the walls slope backward as they
    rise. The first story is also of stones, but such peculiar
    stones as I never expected to see in a dwelling house,
    precisely like those used in the country for fences.'"

"How exquisite!" exclaimed Bessie, clapping her hands in ecstacy.

    "'Some of them seemed to be covered with the gray lichens that
    are found growing on rocks,--'

"How delicious!"

    "'--but I very much fear these will be destroyed by the action
    of the lime in the mortar. The stones vary in color, and at a
    little distance the effect is like a rich mosaic. The corners
    of the house and the sides of the windows are made of
    peculiarly dark, rough-looking bricks that harmonize well with
    the general tone of the stone walls. The second story is of
    wood, covered with shingles that have not been painted, but
    simply oiled, and they have turned a dark reddish-brown. I
    found on inquiry that they are California red wood. The roof is
    of red tiles, and the chromatic effect of the entire building
    is very charming and aristocratic.'"

"That would suit _us_ perfectly," said Jack, "but I think our
aristocratic aunt is more tiresome than the architect. Jim is asleep
and Bessie is on the verge of slumber." But just at that moment Bessie
gave a piercing scream and bounded from the sofa in uncontrollable
affright, while an army of reckless June bugs came dashing in through
the open, unscreened windows.




CHAPTER XII.

FROM MATHEMATICS TO ANCIENT BRIC-A-BRAC.


Taking advantage of the incursion of the June bugs, Jim withdrew in
good order, and Bessie shortly after retired with her tin candlestick.

"Do you seriously intend to allow that pair of incompatibles to go off
to-morrow looking for old furniture and antiquated household
implements?" asked Jill.

"Most certainly I do. It will he the greatest fun in the world. I only
wish we could go as invisible spectators; but, on the whole, we shall
best enjoy imagining what they will say or do if left to their own
devices, knowing, as we should, that our presence would prevent some of
their wildest absurdities. I'm awfully sorry they are not going to
build and furnish a house somewhere in this vicinity, according to
their combined notions."

"And I am extremely sorry you cannot take your thoughts from Bessie
long enough at least to hear the conclusion of Aunt Melville's letter."

"My dear, like John Gilpin, 'of womankind I do admire but one.' I shall
listen with undivided attention to whatever you lay before my ears.
Pray go on."

    "'I was fortunate enough to get a drawing of the interior of
    the reception hall, which, while it is simple and inexpensive,
    is also dignified and impressive. Houses often resemble
    people, and you will easily recall among your friends certain
    ones who, without being either wealthy or brilliant, are still
    very impressive. The other rooms which we visited are ample for
    your needs, as you will find it far more advantageous to
    entertain but few people at a time, and those of the best
    society, than to have larger and more indiscriminate
    gatherings. The amount of room in the house is surprising; but
    that, of course, is because it is so nearly square.'"

"That is feminine logic. A man would have said that the size of a house
determines the amount of room it contains."

"Undoubtedly he would; but it does not," said Jill, decidedly. "I can
show you houses that look large and _are_ large, that make great
pretensions in point of style, that cost a great deal of money, and yet
have no room in them. They have no place for the beds to stand, no room
for the doors to swing, no room for a piano, no room for a generous
sofa, no room for the book-cases, no room for easy stairs, no room for
fireplaces, no room for convenient attendance at the dining-table, no
room for wholesome cooking, no room for sick people, no room for fresh
air, no room for sunlight, no room for an unexpected guest. They have
plenty of rooms, apartments, cells--but no real, generous, comfortable
house room."

"I suppose Aunt Melville refers to the mathematical fact that a house
forty feet square contains more cubic feet than the same length of
walls would hold in a more elongated or irregular shape."

"By the same rule an octagon or circle would be better still, which is
absurd. No; her feminine logic is no worse than yours, and no better.
The amount of room a house contains depends neither upon its size
nor its shape. Her analogy, too, is at fault when she implies that the
outside of a house bears the same relation to the interior that
clothing bears to the person who wears it. The art of the tailor and
dressmaker has at present no other test of merit than fashion and
costliness, elements to which real art, architectural or otherwise, is
always and absolutely indifferent. The external aspect of the house
should be the natural spontaneous outgrowth of its legitimate use and
proper construction, as face, form and carriage express the character
of each individual."

[Illustration: NOT BRILLIANT BUT IMPRESSIVE.]

[Illustration: WOODEN RICHNESS.]

Jill spoke with unwonted seriousness and a wisdom beyond her years.
Even Jack was impressed for the moment, and expressed a wish to tear
down some of the ornamental appendages from his own house. "The
piazzas are well enough--that is, they would be if they were twice as
wide--but the observatory is good for nothing, because nobody can get
into it to observe, unless he crawls along the ridge-pole, and I never
did know what all that mess of wooden stuff under the eaves and about
the windows was for. I suppose it was intended to give the house a
richer look."

[Illustration: NO WASTE OF WOOD.]

"Yes, it enriches it just as countless rows of puffs, ruffles and
flounces, made of coarse cotton cloth with a sewing machine and piled
on without regard to grace or comfort, would 'enrich' a lady's dress."

"I thought you objected to the dress anology?"

"I do, positively, but it appears to have been the theory accepted by
modern architects almost universally. I don't see. Jack, that your
house is any worse than others in this respect, and I have no doubt it
will 'sell' all the better for the superfluous lumber attached to the
outside walls."

"Thank you, my dear! That is the first good word you have spoken for
it. Well, there is one comfort; I am convinced that you didn't commit
the reprehensible folly of marrying me for my house."

"No, indeed, Jack. It was pure devotion; a desperate case of elective
affinity."

"And yet we are happily married! _We_ shall never do for the hero and
heroine of a modern romance. There isn't a magazine editor or a book
publisher that would look at us for a moment."

"Let us be thankful--and finish our letter.

    "'I am anxious, as you know, my dear niece, that you should,
    begin life in a manner creditable to the family, and I trust
    you will allow no romantic or utilitarian notions to prevent
    your conforming to the requirements of good society. This
    house, in all such respects, will be perfectly satisfactory. I
    have bought the plans for you from the owner, and I hope you
    will accept them with my best wishes.'

"And that is all, this time. Aunt Melville's notion of a house seems to
be a place for entertaining the 'best society.' Her zeal is certainly
getting the better of her conscience and judgment. She cannot honestly
buy the plans from the owner of the house, because he never owned them;
they belong to the architect, and she ought to know better than to
advise the use of material that would have to be brought at great
expense from a long distance. If cobble-stones and boulders were
indigenous in this region, and old stone fences could be had for the
asking, I should like to use them, but they are not. It is also evident
that she did not penetrate far into the interior of the house or she
would have discovered an unpardonable defect--the absence of 'back'
stairs. I do not think it very serious in such a plan, where the one
flight is near the centre of the house and is not very conspicuous,
but Aunt Melville would lie awake nights if she knew there were no back
stairs for the servants."

[Illustration: FIRST FLOOR OF THE PROMISE.]

The next morning Jim appeared with the express wagon, and Bessie
climbed upon the high seat beside him under the big brown umbrella, her
Gainsborough hat encircled with a garland of white daisies, huge
bunches of the same blossoms being attached somewhat indiscriminately
to her dress by way of imparting a rural air, and together they drove
off in search of old and forgotten household gods. Jill had suggested
sending them out to investigate, reporting what they found, and
purchasing afterward if thought best, but Jack urged that it would be
wiser to secure their treasures at once, lest the thrifty farmers,
finding their old heir-looms in demand, should mark up the prices while
they were deliberating--a view with which Bessie fully concurred.

[Illustration: SECOND FLOOR OF THE PROMISE.]

Beguiling the way with the duet that is always so delightful to the
performers, whatever the audience may think of it, they followed the
pleasant country roads for many miles without finding a castle that
seemed to promise desirable plunder. A worn-out horseshoe lying in the
road was their first prize. It presaged good luck, and was to be gilded
and hung above the library door. At length they came to a typical old
farm-house, gray and weather-beaten, but still dignified and well cared
for. The big barns stood modestly back from the highway, and the yard
about the front door, enclosed by a once white picket fence, was filled
with the fragrance of cinnamon roses and syringas. As they drove up at
the side of the house across the open lawn, the close cropping of which
showed that the cows were wont to take their final bite upon it as they
came to the yard at night, they encountered an elderly man carrying a
large jug in one hand and apparently just starting for the fields with
some refreshing drink for the workmen.

"Good morning, sir," said Jim, touching his hat. Bessie smiled and
asked, "Are you the farmer?"

"Wal, yes ma'am; I suppose I am. Leastways I own the farm and get my
living off from it as well as I can--same as my fathers did afore me."

"How lovely! Have you got any old--I mean, can you give us a drink of
water? We--we happen to be passing and we're very thirsty."

"Just as well as not. The well is right behind the house. You can jump
down and help yourselves."

"You don't mean jump down the well," said Jim, laughing.

"Not exactly. Will your horse stand?"

"Oh, yes."

When Bessie saw the old well-sweep, which for some unaccountable reason
had not been swept away by a modern pump, she exclaimed in a stage
whisper: "Wouldn't it be glorious if we could carry it home?"

Jim found the cool water most refreshing and thought he would rather
carry home the well.

"What an enormous wood pile," Bessie continued aloud, in a desperate
endeavor to lead up to andirons by an unsuspicious route. "Do you burn
wood?"

"Not so much as we used to. The women folks think they must have it to
cook with, but we use coal a good deal in the winter."

"Don't you have fireplaces?" was the next innocent question.

"Plenty of 'em in the house, but they're mostly bricked up. It takes
too big a wood pile to keep 'em going."

"So you use stoves instead; I suppose it is less trouble. Oh, and that
reminds me, have you any old andirons, anywhere around?"

"Shouldn't be surprised if there was. Yes, there's one now, hangin' on
the gate right behind you."

Bessie, as she afterwards declared, was almost ready to faint at this
announcement, but on turning to look she saw indeed, hanging by a chain
to keep the gate closed, a dumpy, rusty, cast-iron andiron.

"Should you be willing to sell it for old brass? Isn't there a mate to
it somewhere? They generally go in pairs, don't they?"

"No, I shouldn't want to sell it for old brass, because you see it's
iron. Most likely there was a pair of 'em once, but there's no tellin'
where t'other one is now. Maybe in the suller and maybe in the garret."

"Please could we go up in the garret and look for it? We will be very
careful."

The worthy man, considerably puzzled to know what sort of angels he was
entertaining unawares, obtained permission from the "women folks," sent
a boy off with the jug of drink and showed his callers to the topmost
floor of the house.

"Oh, oh! If there isn't a real spinning-wheel. This passes my wildest
anticipations," murmured Bessie to Jim; then, restraining her
enthusiasm for fear of spoiling a bargain, she inquired aloud: "Do any
of your family spin?"

"No, no; not now-a-days. My old mother vised to get the wheel out now
and then, when I was a youngster, but it's broke now and part of it is
lost."

"Would you sell it?"

"If it isn't all here--" Jim began, but Bessie checked him and eagerly
accepted the old wheel, which had lost its head and two or three
spokes, for the moderate sum of one dollar.

Rummaging among old barrels, Jim found the missing half of the pair of
andirons. One broken leg seemed to add to its value in Bessie's eyes
and she quickly closed a bargain for them at fifteen cents, which their
owner, after "hefting" them, "guessed" would be about their value for
old iron. One old chair, minus a back and extremely shaky as to its
legs, and another that had lost a rocker and never had any arms, were
secured for a nominal price, and Bessie's attention was then attracted
to a tall wooden vessel hooped like a barrel, but more slender, "big at
the bottom and small at the top," which proved to be an old churn. Jim
objected to this until his companion explained how it could be
transformed by a judicious application of old gold and crimson into a
most artistic umbrella stand, while the "dasher" would make a striking
ornament for the hall chimney-piece. As they were about to depart with
their treasures, the honest farmer invited them to look at a ponderous
machine five or six feet high and nearly as broad--a horrid monster,
misshapen and huge, that stood in the back chamber over the wood-shed.
It was a cheese-press. "How magnificent!" whispered Bessie, and then,
turning to their host, inquired--"Do you use it every day?"

"Oh, law, no! Hain't used it this twenty years. Make all the cheese at
the factory. It's kind of a queer old thing and I thought maybe you
would like to see it. 'Tain't likely you will ever see another just
like it."

"_Would_ you be willing to sell it?"

"Of course, I'd be willing enough, only it don't seem just right to
sell a thing that ain't good for anything but firewood. However, if you
really want it you may have it for a dollar and a-half, and I'll have
the hired men load it up for you."

"Now, really, Miss Bessie," said Jim, when the farmer had gone to call
the men, "don't you think it's rather a clumsy affair? We can hardly
get it into the express wagon, and I don't see where they can put it if
we carry it home."

"Clumsy! no, indeed, it's _massive_, it's _grand_! There will be plenty
of room in the new house. They will have one entire room for
bric-a-brac."

"But what can they _do_ with it? They won't make cheese."

"Can't you see what a _delicious_ cabinet it will make? These posts and
things can all be carved and decorated, and it will be perfectly
_unique_. There isn't such a cabinet in the whole city of New York. Oh,
I think our trip has been an _immense_ success already. I shall always
believe in horseshoes after this; but _isn't_ it a pity we can't carry
home the well-sweep?"

The huge machine had to be taken from the shed chamber in sections, but
was properly put together again in the wagon by the hired men, and made
the turnout look like a small traveling juggernaut. Just before
starting: Bessie espied, leaning against the fence, a hen-coop from
which the feathered family had departed, and explaining to Jim that if
the sides were painted red and the bars gilded it would be a charming
ornament for the front porch, persuaded him to add that to their
already imposing load. Then they departed, leaving the farmer and his
men in doubt whether to advertise a pair of escaped lunatics or accept
their visitors as "highly cultured" members of modern society.

When they reached home Jack had just come in from the office. He looked
out of the window as they drove up, felt his strength suddenly give
way, and rolled on the floor in convulsions.

"Less than five dollars for the whole lot, did you say, Jim? I wouldn't
have missed _seeing_ that load for fifty."

The next day was Sunday. Monday afternoon Bessie went home.




CHAPTER XIII.

ECONOMY, CLEANLINESS AND HEALTH.


"Dirt is matter out of place," quoted Uncle Harry, in one of his
erratic epistles which Jack and Jill always read with interest if not
profit. "When you find anything that seems unclean or offensive in any
part of your house, remember this: the fault is not in the thing
itself, but in your ignorant or thoughtless management. There isn't a
material thing in the universe, whatever its name or characteristic
qualities maybe; not a flaunting weed nor an unseen miasmatic vapor,
which is not created for some good and wise purpose. It is for us to
learn those purposes. The grand secret of safe and comfortable living
lies in keeping yourself and everything about you in the right place. I
hear much of the dangers and annoyances that arise from modern
plumbing. I am not surprised by them; on the contrary, I wonder they
are not more numerous and fatal, since nothing is more inconsistent
with the first principles of comfort and health than our relations to
these 'modern conveniences.' Instead of disposing of what are
incorrectly called waste materials according to nature's modes, we
persist in defying her examples and her laws, even after we fully
understand them, and, in the vain hope of adding to our own case,
bring upon ourselves untold calamities. 'Earth to earth' is a mandate
that cannot be disregarded with impunity. The infinite laboratories of
nature welcome to their crucibles all the strange and awful elements
which we fail to comprehend and against which we wage a futile warfare.
If all these miscalled 'wastes' that we find so hurtful and offensive
when out of place in and around our homes could be consigned to the
bosom of mother earth the moment they seem to us worthless, they would
be at once changed to life-giving forces, out of which forms of
freshness and beauty would arise to fill us with delight. They are
willing to serve us whenever we give them an opportunity. The one
direct and infallible mode of doing that is to put them in the ground
before they have a chance to work us injury. If we bury them, or,
rather, plant them, they will bring forth, some thirty, some sixty,
some an hundredfold.

[Illustration: NO PLACE FOR SECRET FOES.]

"It is my impression that sewers were originally invented by the Evil
one. He couldn't drag men down to his dominions fast enough, so he
moved a portion of his estate to this planet, and lest its true
character should be discovered, buried it under paved streets and
flowery parks. We might easily and quietly put these crude materials
into convenient receptacles, to be carried where they will bless the
world by making two ears of corn grow where one grew before. This we
could do, each one for ourselves, or more advantageously by cooperating
with one another. We are too wasteful, too indolent, too ignorant.
Tempted by the invisible sewers we imprison these misplaced and
inharmonious elements for a time in lead or iron pipes, while they grow
more hostile, occasionally escaping by violence or stealth into our
chambers, and then with many nice contrivances and much perishable
machinery we try to wash them away with a bucket of water. Not to carry
them where they will do any good, not to put them out of existence, but
simply to hide them: to send them out of our immediate sight, and very
likely into some greater mischief. The system is radically wrong, and
while many of its existing evils may be averted, they cannot all be
removed till we make our attacks from a different base. Improving
sewers, like strengthening prison walls, is a good thing if the
institutions remain; to prevent the need of maintaining them would be
better still. Three-fourths of the solid wastes that proceed from
human dwellings--scraps of food, waste paper, worthless vegetables,
worn-out utensils, bones, weeds, old boots and shoes, whatever
unmanageable and unnamable rubbish appears--ought to be at once
consumed by fire, for which purpose a small cremating furnace should be
found in every house. A similar trial by fire would reduce a large part
of the liquids and semi-liquids to solid form to be also consumed, and
the rest, absorbed by dry earth or ashes, could easily be transported
to the barren fields that await the intelligence and power of man to
transform them into blooming gardens.

"Of the usual modes of bringing water to our houses to wash away these
things I know but little, because there is but little to be known.
Complications and mysteries are not to my taste. I find no satisfaction
in overthrowing a man of straw, and am comparatively indifferent to the
rival claims of patentees and manufacturers, except as they promise
good material, faithful workmanship and moderate prices.

"The one thing needful, if we adopt the hydraulic method of carrying
away these waste substances, is a smooth cast-iron pipe running from
the ground outside the house in through the lower part and up and out
through the roof. It should be open at both ends, and so free from
obstruction that a cat, a chimney-swallow or a summer breeze could pass
through it without difficulty. I would, however, put screens over the
open ends to keep out the cats and the swallows. The purifying breezes
should blow through in summer and winter without let or hindrance, and
to promote their circulation I would, if possible, place the pipe
beside a warm chimney. Yet if the air it contains should sometimes move
downward it will do no special harm; anything is better than
stagnation. Into this open pipe, which should be not only water-tight
but air-tight through its entire length, all waste-pipes from the house
should empty as turbid mountain torrents pour into the larger stream
that flows through the valley. (Fig. 1.) Now, unless the upward draught
through this large pipe is constant and strong, you will see at once
that the air contained in it (which we must treat as though it were
always poisonous) would be liable to come up through these branches
into the rooms, where they stand with open mouths ready to swallow
whatever is poured into them. It is necessary, therefore, to build
dams across them that will allow water to go down but prevent air from
going up. These dams are called 'traps.' They are intended to catch
only hurtful elements that might seek to intrude. It often happens that
those who set them get caught, for they are not infallible. Whatever
the form or patent assumed by these water-dams, they amount to a bend
in the pipe rilled with water. (Fig. 2.) Sometimes a ball or other form
of valve is used, but the water is the mainstay.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

"Theoretically, this is the whole machinery of safe, 'sanitary'
plumbing: A large open pipe kept as clean and free as possible, into
which the smaller drains empty, these smaller drains or waste-pipes
having their mouths always full, and being able, so to speak, to
swallow in but one direction. Everything can go down; nothing can come
up. That all these pipes shall be of sound material, not liable to
corrosion; that the different pieces of which they are composed shall
be tightly joined; that they shall be so firmly supported that they
will not bend or break by their own weight, or through the changes of
temperature to which they are subject, and that they shall be, if not
always in plain sight, at most only hidden by some covering easily
removed, are points which the commonest kind of common sense would not
fail to observe.

"Practically, there are weak spots in the system, even if plumbers were
always as honest as George Washington---before he became a man, and as
wise as Solomon--before he became discouraged. A water barricade,
unless it is as wide as the English Channel, is not a safeguard against
dangerous invasion. A slight pressure of air, as every boy blowing soap
bubbles can show you, will force a way through a basin full, and the
same thing would happen if there should chance to be a backward current
of air through these pipes, with this difference, that while the soap
bubbles are harmless beauties, these may be filled with the germs of
direful diseases. Still another danger to which this light water-seal
is exposed is that a downward rush of water may cause a vacuum in the
small pipes, somewhat as the exhaust steam operates the air-brakes, and
empty the trap, leaving merely an open crooked pipe. Both these weak
points may be strengthened by a breathing hole in the highest part of
the small pipe below the trap. This must, of course, have a ventilating
pipe of its own, which, to be always effectual, should be as large as
the waste-pipe itself. (Fig. 3.)

[Illustration: Fig 3.]

[Illustration: Fig 4]

"Now, if the water that fills these traps and stops the open mouths of
the drains were always clean, there would be no further trouble from
this source. Unfortunately it is not; and although constant
watchfulness might keep it so, the safety that only comes from eternal
vigilance is an uncomfortable sort of safety--if we have too much of
it life becomes a burden. This particular ill might be remedied by some
contrivance whereby the upper ends of the waste-pipes should be
effectually corked--not simply covered, but _corked_ as tightly as a
bottle of beer--at all times except when in actual use. This would
doubtless be more troublesome, but indolence is at the bottom of most
of our woes: our labor-saving contrivances bring upon us our worst
calamities. Even this thorough closing of the outlet of washbasins and
bath-tubs, as they are usually made, would be of little avail, for they
are furnished with an 'overflow' (Fig. 4), through which exhalations
from the trap would rise, however tightly the outlet might be sealed.
It is also customary and doubtless wise, considering our habit of doing
things so imperfectly the first time that we have no confidence in
their stability, to place large basins of sheet-lead under all plumbing
articles, lest from some cause they should 'spring a leak' and damage
the floors or ceilings below them. One strong safeguard being better
than two weak ones, I would dispense with the 'overflow' and arrange so
that when anything ran over accidentally the lead basin or 'safe'
should catch the water and carry it through an ample waste-pipe of its
own to some inoffensive outlet. This would perhaps involve setting the
plumbing articles in the most simple and open fashion--which ought
always to be done. 'Cabinets,' cupboards, casings and wood finish, no
matter how full of conveniences, or how elegantly made, are worse than
useless in connection with plumbing fixtures, which, for all reasons,
should stand forth in absolute nakedness. They must be so strongly and
simply made that no concealment will be necessary.

"One more danger closes the list, so far as the system is concerned.
Even if the water in the traps is clean and inoffensive it will
evaporate quickly in warm weather, and then the prison door is open
again. This adds another vigil which we can never lay aside if we must
have plumbing and water traps. The burden may be somewhat
lightened--since we are prone to forgetfulness as stones to fall
downward--by using traps made of glass and leaving them in plain sight.

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

"I conclusion, I wish to remind you that the lower end of the main
drain must be protected from the iniquity of the sewer or cesspool to
which it runs by another trap, or dam, just below the open pipe that
admits fresh air from outside the house (Fig. 5), and also, as I have
before remarked, that the system is wrong. The rising tide of
civilization will some time wash it all away."

"Uncle Harry's notion of reform," said Jack, after the long letter had
been read, "seems to be to blow the universe to pieces and then put it
together again on a new and improved plan. It strikes me we had better
fight it out on this line and try to straighten the evils we know
something about rather than invent new ones. If we had begun on that
track and tried to utilize the waste materials on strictly economical
principles, perhaps by this time our methods and machinery would have
been so far perfected that the real or imaginary evils of modern
plumbing would not have existed. It seems a pity to throw away all we
have accomplished and begin again."

"That is a part of the price paid for progress," said Jill. "Stage
coaches are useless when steam appears, and locomotives must go to the
junk shop when electricity is ready to be harnessed. But I'm afraid we
cannot afford to be pioneers, and I'm sure the neighbors are not ready
to co-operate. We must still 'go by water,' and the important question
is where to send the lower end of the main drain. There is no sewer in
the street, and a cesspool is an atrocity worthy of the darkest ages.
The only safe thing appears to be the sub-surface irrigation plan, for
which, fortunately, there is plenty of room on our lot. This comes very
near to Uncle Harry's notion of 'earth to earth' in the quickest time
possible. If we do it and accept the architect's suggestion in the plan
of the house we shall be reasonably safe from that most mysterious of
all modern foes--sewer-gas."

"I've forgotten the architect's suggestions; in fact, I don't believe
my head is quite equal to housebuilding with all the latest notions.
When _my_ house was built I just told the carpenter to get up something
stylish and good, about like Judge Gainsboro's. He showed me the plans,
I signed the contract, and that was the whole of it. I supposed a house
was a house. Now, before the new house is begun, I'm like Dick
Whittington in the days of his poverty--I've no peace by day or night."

"Poor fellow!"

"I shudder to think what it will he when the house is fairly under way.
I can see five hundred different things at once, but when each one has
five hundred sides and we get up into the hundred thousands, I begin to
feel dizzy. Uncle Harry has settled the plumbing question to his own
satisfaction, so far as first principles are concerned; but who will
tell us what kind of pipes and trimmings and bowls and basins and traps
and plugs and stops and pedals and pulls and cranks and pistons and
plungers and hooks and staples and couplings and brakes and chains and
pans and basins and tanks and floats and buoys and strainers and safes
and bibbs and tuckers we are to adopt? If I should consume midnight oil
during a full four years' course at a college for plumbers I should
still find myself just upon the threshold of the temple of knowledge."




CHAPTER XIV.

SAFE FLUES AND MORE LIGHT.


By a tender but vigorous application of the remedies usual in such
cases, Jack was speedily restored to his wonted equanimity, and Jill,
laying Uncle Harry aside, took up the architect's suggestions
concerning the plumbing, which referred rather to its relations to the
plan of the house than to the details of the work itself.

"A bath-room, with all the plumbing articles it usually contains, must
possess at least three special characteristics. It must be easily
warmed in cold weather, otherwise the annual bill for repairs will be
greater than the cost of coal for the whole house; its walls, floors
and ceilings must be impervious to sound. The music of murmuring brooks
is delightful to our ears, so is the patter of the soft rain on the
roof; but the splashing of water in a, bath-tub and the gurgling of
unseen water-pipes are not pleasant accompaniments to a dinner-table
conversation. Thirdly, it must be perfectly ventilated--not the
drainpipes merely,--but the room itself in summer and in winter. Two of
the above conditions can best be secured by arranging to have this
important room placed in a detached or semi-detached wing; and here
begin the compromises between convenience, cost and safety. It is
convenient to have a bath-room attached to every chamber, and there is
no doubt that this may be done with entire safety, provided you do not
regard the cost. In your plan I have adopted the middle course. There
is one bath-room for all the chambers of the second floor, not too
remote but somewhat retired, and having no communication with any other
room. It is ventilated by a large open flue carried up directly through
the roof; it has also an outside window and inlets for fresh air near
the floor. All the walls and partitions around it will be double and
filled with mineral wool, and the floors will be deafened. The 'house
side' of the water-closet traps will have three-inch iron pipes running
to the ventilating flue beside the kitchen-chimney, a flue that will
always be warm, and therefore certain to give a strong upward draught
at all times, which cannot be said of any other flue in the house, not
even of the main drain, or soil-pipe, which passes up through the roof.
It would be easy to keep other flues warmed in cold weather by
steam-pipes, but in summer you will have no steam for heating purposes.
A 'circulation-pipe' might be attached to a boiler on the kitchen range
for this purpose, but in the present case such a contrivance would cost
more than the iron pipe carried from the bath-room to the flue that is
warmed by the kitchen fire. A good way to build this ventilating flue
is to inclose the smoke-pipe from the range, which may be of iron or
glazed earthen pipe, in a larger brick flue or chamber (Fig. 1),
keeping it in place by bars of iron laid into the masonry. The rising
current of warm air around the heated smoke-pipe will be as constant
and reliable as the trade winds. It will be well, indeed, if all your
chimneys are made in a similar manner; that is, by enclosing
hard-burned glazed pipe in a thin wall of bricks. Such chimneys will
not only draw better than those made in the usual way, but there will
be less danger from 'defective flues.' A four-inch wall of bricks
between us and destruction by fire is a frail barrier, especially if
the work is carelessly done or the mortar has crumbled from the joints.
To build the chimneys with double or eight-inch walls makes them very
large, more expensive, and still not as good as when they contain the
smooth round flues. To leave an air-chamber beside or between them for
ventilating (Fig. 2), is better than to open directly into the
smoke-flue, because it will not impair the draught for the fire, and
there will be no danger of a sooty odor in the room when the
circulation happens to be downward, as it will be occasionally. The
outside chimney, if there is one, should have an extra air-chamber
between the very outer wall and the back of the fireplace to save heat
(Fig. 3), a precaution that removes to a great extent the common
objection to such chimneys. Whatever else you do, let these 'windpipes
of good hospitalitie' have all the room they need. I shall not
willingly carry them off by any devious way to be hidden in an obscure
corner or dark closet, nor yet to give them a more respectable and
well-balanced position on the roof. Like the wild forest trees they
shall grow straight up toward heaven from the spot where they are first
planted. If we happen to want a window where the chimney stands in an
outer wall we will make one between the flues, as one might build a hut
in the huge branches of a mighty oak. It isn't the best place for the
window or the hut, but circumstances may justify it; as, for instance,
when we must have the outlook in a certain direction, but cannot spare
the wall-space for a window beside the chimney. The jambs beside a
window so situated will be very wide, and you may, if you please,
extend the view of the landscape indefinitely by setting two mirrors
_vis-à-vis_ in the opening at either side. This will also send the
sunshine into the room after the sun has passed by the other windows
on the same side of the house. It is rather a pretty fancy, too, when
the outside view does not require a clear window, to set a picture in
colored glass above the mantel, and the same thins: may be arranged in
the sideboard, if it happens to stand against the outer wall. These are
_fancies_, however, which lose their beauty and fitness unless they
seem to have been spontaneously produced. There should be no apparent
striving for effect."

[Illustration: SAFE AND SAVING FLUES.]

[Illustration: SAFE AND SAVING FLUES.]

[Illustration: A PICTURE IN GLASS OVER THE FIREPLACE.]

"I like the idea of setting mirrors in the deep window-jambs, whether
they are in the chimney or out of it," said Jill. "If I was obliged to
live in a room where the sun never shone of its own accord, I would set
a trap for it baited with large mirrors fixed on some sort of a
windlass in a way to send the sunshine straight into my windows."

"Capital! You could do that easily, and if you wanted a green-house on
the north side it would only be necessary to set up a few
looking-glasses to pour a blazing sun upon it all day long. You might
need a little clockwork to keep them adjusted at the right angles, but
Yankee invention ought to be equal to that. I have no doubt we shall
see patent sunshine-distributors in the market very shortly if your
idea gets abroad; in fact, I shouldn't be surprised to hear that a
company proposed to set up mammoth reflectors to keep the sun from
setting at all until he drops into the Pacific Ocean."

[Illustration: GLASS OF MANY COLORS, SHAPES AND SIZES.]

"Well, you may laugh at my invention; I shall surely try it when I am
obliged to live in a house that does not get sunlight in the regular
way. As for the stained glass picture over the chimney-piece, I should
like it for the bright color and because the lamps would make it so
charming from the street outside. I shall also want colored glass in
the upper part of the bay windows. The architect says we can have it
and still keep the lower panes clear and large. He sends some sketches
by way of suggestion, and thinks we may use it in the lower part of
some of the windows to conceal a window-seat or other furniture. I
should prefer screens of some other kind in such places, keeping the
stained glass up where it would show against the sky. He says this
colored glass is not necessarily expensive; that it may be set in
common wood-sash or in lead-sash, as we please, and that it will not
affect the usual opening and closing of the windows. He advises
plate-glass for the larger lights, if we can afford it, not because it
gives the house a more elegant appearance, though that is not a wholly
unworthy motive, but because a beautiful landscape is so much more
beautiful when it can be plainly seen. The instinct that prompts us to
throw the window wide open in order to get a more satisfactory view is
an unanswerable argument in favor of large, clear lights of glass for
windows intended for outlooks."

"And here is an illustration right before us," said Jack. "I am
impelled by a powerful impulse to open the window and see if I can
recognize the lady driving up the street. It wouldn't be good manners,
but I wish the window was plate-glass."

To Jack's astonishment, however, Jill threw open the window and waved
her handkerchief in cordial salutation as Aunt Jerusha drove slowly up
to the house. "Doing her own work" for half a century had not rendered
her incapable of taking and enjoying a carriage ride of fifteen miles
alone to visit her niece.

Like all wise people who are able to give advice, Aunt Jerusha offered
none until it was asked, and then gave only in small doses. She had
never seen the house that Jack built, but had heard much of it from the
friends and relatives who had never underrated Jill's obstinacy in
refusing to accept it as a permanent home.

"I almost wonder at you, Jill, for being so set against it. I'm sure
it's a fine house and cost a good deal of money. There must be some
drawback that doesn't show. I hope It isn't haunted."

"That's it, Aunt Jerusha; it's haunted. Several uncomfortable demons
have taken possession of it and Jill isn't able to exorcise them. It
was a great grief to me at first, and I made a bargain with Jill to
keep still about them, but it is an open secret now and she may tell
you everything."

[Illustration: SHELVES IN THE MIDDLE, CUPBOARDS ABOVE AND BELOW.]

"Very well. I can easily explain the mystery. The mischief began with
the evil spirits of Ignorance and Incompetence. The carpenter who
planned the house knew nothing about our tastes or needs, and the
builder was unable to make a comfortable flight of stairs, safe
chimneys, smooth floors or tight windows. After these two came another
pair, worse than the first--Ostentation and Avarice. They tried to make
a grand display and at the same time a large profit on the job. How
can I exorcise such demons as these except by tearing down the house?"

"Couldn't you sell it, dear? What seem demons to you might appear like
angels of light to some one else," said Aunt Jerusha.

"You are an angel of light to me, Aunt Jerusha," said Jack. "But I
might have known you would stand up for my house."

"Aunt Jerusha, there isn't a closet in the whole establishment," said
Jill, solemnly, knowing that defect to be an architectural sin which
even her aunt's broad charity would fail to cover.

"Oh, Jill! where have you laid your conscience? I can't stay to hear my
house abused. Please show Aunt Jerusha the pantry and the china-closet
and I will flee to the office."

"Why, yes, to be sure you have a very nice buttery and china-cupboard."

"I meant good, generous closets for the chambers. Of course there's a
pantry, but I don't think the arrangement of shelves, drawers and
cupboards is very convenient."

"It seems very liberal."

"Yes, but would you advise me to have the pantry in the new house like
it?"

"Well, no, dear; since you asked me, I wouldn't. It is possible to have
too many conveniences even in a pantry. It is a good plan to have a few
cupboards to keep some things from the dust and others from the light,
but most of our raw materials now-a-days come in tight boxes or cans,
and I find them more handy standing on the shelves than shut up in
drawers. I don't suppose it would be so in your case, dear, but a
drawer sometimes hides very slovenly habits. It is so easy to drop an
untidy thing into a drawer and shove it out of sight. These large
wooden boxes, all built in with their covers and handles, look nice and
handy, but it's hard to clean them out. I would rather have good wide
shelves and light movable tin boxes like those used in the groceries.
You could buy them, I suppose, but I had mine made at the tin-shop to
fit the shelves. I can take them out and wash them any time, and they
never get musty, as wooden boxes will, even with the best of care. But
you mustn't be biased by my old-fashioned notions."

"I think they are very good notions if they are old-fashioned. If we
have cupboards inside the pantry, drawers inside the cupboards, and
boxes and cases inside the drawers, finding the spices is like opening
a nest of. Chinese puzzles. A mechanic would never hide the tools in
his workshop in that way."

"How do you reach the upper shelves?"

"I never reach them, and all that room is wasted. It is worse than
wasted. It is a reservoir for dust and cobwebs."

"Wouldn't it be well, dear, if all the upper part was made into
cupboards for things seldom used?"

"Indeed it would. I think I will have the new pantry made something
like this: low cupboards next to the floor, for things that; need to be
shut up and yet must be handy; on the top of these, which will be not
quite three feet high, a very wide shelf; over this several open
shelves, as high as I can easily reach; and above the shelves, filling
the space to the ceiling, short cupboards entirely around the room for
cracked dishes that are too good to throw away, but are never used: for
ice-cream freezers in the winter, and a great many more things that
belong to the same category--a sort of hospital for disabled or retired
culinary utensils. Now we will look at the china closet, but we shall
need the gas in order to see it in all its glory, and you can tell Jack
it is lovely with a clear conscience."

"I never speak without a clear conscience," said Aunt Jerusha mildly.




CHAPTER XV.

A DANGEROUS RIVAL.


"Dear me," said Aunt Jerusha, as Jill, after displaying the kitchen
pantry, showed her the windowless china closet, elegant with varnished
walnut, plate-glass and silver-plated plumbing, "dear me, this is as
fine as a parlor. It seems a real pity to keep it all out of sight."

"The pity is that it was made so fine. I should not object to polished
walnut in a light room, although cherry, birch or some other
fine-grained, hard, light-colored wood is preferable; but all this
ornamental work, these mouldings, cornices and carved handles are worse
than useless--they are ugly and troublesome. If I can have my own
way--I'm glad Jack isn't here to make comments--I shall have every part
of the new pantries as plain and smooth as a marble slab, with not a
groove or a moulding to hold dust, and never a crack nor a crevice in
which the tiniest spider can hide. The shelves will be thin, light and
strong; some wide and some narrow; a wineglass doesn't need as much
room as a soup tureen; the cupboard doors shall be as plain as doors
can be made, and shall _not_ be hung like these, to swing out against
each other at the constant risk of breaking the glass and of pushing
something from the narrow shelf in front of them. They ought to slide,
one before another, and the front shelf should be wide enough to hold
_lots_ of things when they are handed down from the upper part of the
cupboards."

"I'm sure the little sink must be handy," said Aunt Jerusha, amiably
looking for merits where Jill saw only defects.

"It might be if there was room enough at each side for drainers and for
dishes to stand before and after washing. I don't wonder that Jack's
china is 'nicked' till the edges look like saw teeth; glass and fine
crockery can't be piled up into pyramids even by the most experienced
builders without serious damage to the edges. There ought to be four
times as much space at each side."

"I suppose there wasn't quite room enough."

"There was _always_ room enough. There's enough now outside, and would
have been inside, if the house had been well planned," said Jill rather
sharply.

"These are proper, nice, large drawers."

"They are too nice and too large. Even when they are but half full I
have to tumble their contents all over to find any particular thing,
unless it lies on top. Some drawers ought to be large and some small,
but I don't believe there ever was a man," said Jill vehemently, "who
knew enough to arrange the small comforts and conveniences for
housekeeping. Every day I am exasperated by something which Jack never
so much as noticed. When I explain it he laughs and says it is
fortunate we have so good an opportunity for learning what to avoid,
and all the time I am certain he thinks there will be a great many more
faults in the new house. If there are I shall be sorry it is
fire-proof."

[Illustration: "THE OAKS."]

"Why, Jill, my dear, don't be rash! That doesn't sound like you. You
mustn't set your heart on having things exactly to suit you in this
world. I've lived a great many years, and a good many times I find it
easier to bring my mind to things as they are than it is to make
everything come just to my mind. I've seen plenty of women wear
themselves out for want of things to do with, and I've seen other women
break down from having too many; trying to keep up with all the modern
fashions and conveniences, and to manage their houses with the same
kind of regularity--'system' they call it--that men use in carrying on
a manufacturing business."

"Well, why shouldn't they, Aunt 'Rusha?"

"I'll tell you why, my dear. A business man has a certain, single,
definite thing to do or to make. Every day's work is very much like
that of the day before. He may try to improve gradually, but, in the
main, it is the same thing over and over again. Our home life ought not
to be like that. A man ought not to be merely an engine or a cash-book;
a woman ought to be something more than a dummy or a fashion-plate; our
children should not be like so many spools of thread or suits of
clothes, turned in the same lathe, spun to the same yarn, and cut
according to the same pattern and rule. I'm sure I could never have
done my work and brought up six children without some sort of a
system, or if your uncle had been a bad provider. But I never could
have got on as well as I have if I had given all my mind to keeping
things in order and learning how to use new-fashioned labor-saving
contrivances. There's nothing more honorable for womankind," said Aunt
Jerusha, as she rolled up her knitting and prepared to set out on her
homeward ride, "than housework, but it ain't the chief end of woman,
and unless your house is something more than a workshop or a showcase,
it will always be a good deal less than a home."

Jill hardly needed this parting admonition, but listened to it and to
much more good advice with the respect due to one who, for nearly half
a century, had looked well to the ways of her household, whose helping
hands were always outstretched to the poor and needy, whose children
rose up and called her blessed, and whose husband had never ceased to
praise her. After her departure her niece indulged in a short season of
solemn reflection, striving faithfully to attain to that wisdom which
always knows when to protest against existing circumstances and when to
accept them with equanimity. Ultimately she reached the conclusion
that, while the house that Jack built might indeed be a thoroughly
comfortable home to one who had a contented mind, it was really her
duty in her probationary housekeeping to be as critical as possible.

Among other things the doors came in for a share of her usually amiable
denunciation. She declared they were huge and heavy enough in
appearance for prison cells, yet so loosely put together that their
prolonged existence seemed to be a question of glue. They were swollen
in the damp, warm weather till they refused to _be_ shut, and would
doubtless shrink so much under the influence of furnace heat in the
winter that they would refuse to _stay_ shut. The closet doors swung
against the windows, excluding instead of admitting the light. The
doors of the chambers opened squarely upon the beds, and there seemed
to have been no thought of convenient wall spaces for pictures and
furniture.

[Illustration: OUTSIDE BARRIERS.]

The architect's theory of doors, as expounded in one of his letters,
was simple enough: "Outside doors are barricades; they should be solid
and strong in fact and in appearance. Inner doors, from room to room,
require no special strength; they should turn whichever way gives the
freest passage and throws them most out of the way when they are open.
Seclusion for the inmates is the chief service of chamber doors, and
they should be placed and hung so as _not_ to give a direct glimpse
across the bed or into the room the moment they are set even slightly
ajar. Closet doors are screens simply, and ought to hide the interior
of the closet when they are partially open, as well as when they are
closed. They may be as light as it is possible to make them. In many
houses one-half the doors might wisely be sent to the auction-room and
the proceeds invested in portières, which are often far more suitable
and convenient than solid doors, especially for chamber closets, for
dressing-rooms, or other apartments communicating in suites, and not
infrequently a heavy curtain is an ample barrier between the principal
rooms. It may be well to supplement them, with light sliding doors, to
be used in an emergency, but which being rarely seen, may be
exceedingly simple and inexpensive, having no resemblance to the rest
of the finish in the room. For that matter such conformity is not
required of any of the doors, though it is reckoned by builders as one
of the cardinal points in hard-wood finish that veneered doors must
'match' the finish of the rooms in which they show. This is absurd.
Doors are under no such obligations. They may be of any sort of wood,
metal or fabric. They may be veneered, carved, gilded, ebonized,
painted, stained or 'decorated.' To finish and furnish a room entirely
with one kind of wood, making the wainscot, architraves, cornices,
doors and mantels, the chairs, tables, piano, bookcase, or sideboard,
all of mahogany, oak, or whatever may be chosen--the floors, too,
perhaps, and the picture frames--is strictly orthodox and eminently
respectable; but like the invariable use of 'low tones' in decorating
walls and ceilings, it betrays a sort of helplessness and lack of
courage. Discords in sound, color and form are, indeed, always hateful,
and they are sure to be produced when ignorance or accident strikes the
keys. Yet, on the other hand, neutrality and monotone are desperately
tedious, and it is better to strive and fail than to be hopelessly
commonplace."

[Illustration: INSIDE BARRIERS.]

[Illustration: COMMON UGLINESS.]

[Illustration: SIMPLE GRACE.]

This advice concerned not the doors alone, but referred to other
queries that had been raised as to the interior finish generally.

One evening Jack came home and found Jill "in the dumps," or as near as
she ever came to that unhappy state of mind, the consequence, as it
appeared, of Aunt Melville's zeal in her behalf.

"Why should these plans worry you?" said Jack. "I thought common sense
was your armor and decision your shield against Aunt Melville's erratic
arrows of advice."

"My armor is intact, but, for a moment, I have lowered my shield and it
has cost me an effort to raise it again, I supposed my mind was fixed
beyond the possibility of change, but this is a wonderfully taking
plan. At first I felt that if our lot had not been bought and the
foundation actually begun we would certainly begin anew and have a
house something like these plans. Then it occurred to me that in
building a house that is to be our home as long as we live, perhaps,
it would be the height of absurdity to tie ourselves down to one little
spot on the broad face of this great, beautiful world and live in a
house that will never be satisfactory, just because we happen to have
this bit of land in our possession and have spent upon it a few hundred
dollars."

"Sensible, as usual. What next?"

"Well, this last and best discovery of Aunt Melville's was undoubtedly
made like our own plan to fit a particular site, and it seems beginning
at the wrong end to arrange the house first and then try to find a lot
to suit it."

"I don't see it in that light," said Jack. "I know the architect has
been preaching the importance of adapting the plan to the lot, but if
two thousand dollars are going into the land and eight thousand into
the house, I should say the house is entitled to the first choice."

"Certainly, if it was a city lot, with no character of its own, a mere
rectangular piece of land shut in upon three sides and open at one. But
ours has certain strong points not to be found in any other unoccupied
lot in town. Besides, there are other reasons why it would not answer
for us; but _if_ our lot was right for it, and _if_ we wanted so large
a house, _how_ I should enjoy building it!"

"I don't see anything so very remarkable about the plan," said Jack,
taking up the drawings.

"My dear, short-sighted husband," said Jill with the utmost
impressiveness of tone and manner, "it is a _one-story house_. 'There
shall be no more stairs' sounds almost as delightful as the scriptural
promise of no more sea. And look at the plan itself: The great square
vestibule, or reception-room, with the office at one side--wouldn't
you enjoy that, Jack?--then a few steps higher the big keeping-room,
with a huge fireplace confronting you, and room enough for--anything.
For games, for dancing, for a billiard table, for a grand piano, for a
hammock--or--"

"Say a sewing machine, a spinning-wheel or something useful."

"Anything you like, a studio or a picture gallery, for it is twice as
high as the other rooms, and lighted from the roof. At the right of
this, and with such a great wide door between them that they seem like
two parts of the same room, is the sitting-room, with another great
fireplace in the corner, bay window and a conservatory fronting the
wide entrance to the dining-room, at the farther end of which there is
still another grand fireplace, with a stained-glass window above it.
These three rooms--four, if we count the conservatory--are just as near
perfection as possible. Then see the long line of chambers, closets and
dressing-rooms running around the south and east sides, every one with
a southern window, and all communicating with the corridor that leads
from the keeping-room, yet sufficiently united to form a complete
family suite. The first floor--I mean the _one_ floor--is five or six
feet from the ground, so there can be no dampness in the rooms--and
just think what a cellar! Altogether too much for us."

"Indeed, there isn't. I'd have a bowling alley, a skating rink, a
machine shop, a tennis court, and--a rifle range. Yes, it _is_ a taking
plan, but there are two things that I don't understand. How can you
cover such a big box, and where is the cooking to be done?"

[Illustration: FIRST FLOOR PLAN OF "THE OAKS."]

"The old rule of two negatives applies. Even a one-story house must
have a roof, and the breadth of this makes a roof large enough to hold
not only the kitchen but the servants' room on the same upper level."

"A kitchen up stairs!" exclaimed Jack, for once startled into
solemnity.

"Aunt Melville considers this the crowning glory of the plan. Owing to
this elevation of the cooking range there is no back door, no back
yard, no chance for an uncouth or an unsightly precinct at either side
of the house."

"That would be something worth living for. I think, Jill, we had better
examine these plans a little farther."

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XVI.

A NEW WAY OF GETTING UP STAIRS AND A NEW MISSIONARY FIELD.


"The question of getting up stairs," said Jack, as they continued the
study of the one-story plan, "is at least an interesting one. It seems
to be accepted as a foregone conclusion that modern dwelling houses,
even in the country, where the cost of the land actually covered by the
house is of no consequence, must be two stories at least above the
basement; but I doubt whether this principle in the evolution of
domestic habitations is well established. Between the aboriginal
wigwam, whose first and only floor is the bare earth itself, and the
'high-basement-four-story-and-French-roof' style, there is somewhere
the happy medium which our blessed posterity--blessed in having had
such wise ancestors--will universally adopt as the fittest survivor of
our uncounted fashions. I fancy it will be much nearer to this
one-story house, with the high basement and big attic, than to the
seven-story mansard with sub-cellar for fuel and furnace. Still the
tendency during the last fifty years has been upward. Our grandfathers
preferred to sleep on the ground floor; _we_ should expect to be
carried off by burglars or malaria if we ventured to close our eyes
within ten feet of the ground. Our city cousins like to be two or
three times as high. Under these circumstances building a one-story
house would be likely to prove a flying-not in the face of Providence,
but, what is reckoned more dangerous and discreditable--flying in the
face of custom. Humility isn't popular in the matter of
house-building."

"I am not afraid of custom, and have no objection to a reasonable
humility," said Jill, "but I never once thought of burglars. If a house
has but one floor I think it should be so for from the ground as to be
practically a 'second' floor. The main point is to have all the family
rooms on one level."

"That is, a 'flat.'"

"Yes, one flat; not a pile of flats one above another, as they are
built in cities, but one large flat raised high enough to be entirely
removed from the moisture of the ground, to give a pleasant sense of
security from outside intrusion and to afford convenient outlooks from
the windows. One or two guest rooms, that are not often used, might be
on a second floor, under the roof, if there was space enough."

"But this plan has the servants' chambers, the kitchen and the store
closets all in the roof. Isn't that rather overdoing the matter?"

"Better in the attic than in the basement. It is light, dry and 'airy.'
There is no danger that the odors of cooking will come down, and as for
the extra trouble, a well-arranged elevator will take supplies from the
basement up twenty feet to the level of the kitchen, store-rooms and
pantries as easily as they could be taken the usual distances
horizontally. In brief, a kitchen above the dining-room is at worst no
more 'inconvenient' than below it. Of course, there must be stairs even
in a one-story house, but they would not be in constant use. Instead of
living edgewise, so to speak, we should be spread out flatwise. We
could climb when we chose, but should not of necessity be forever
climbing. Yes, I like this plan exceedingly, not alone for its one
principal floor, but I have always had a fancy for the 'rotunda'
arrangement--one large central apartment for any and all purposes, out
of which the rooms for more special and private uses should open.
Indeed, I don't see how a very large house can be built in any other
way without leaving a considerable part of the interior as useless for
domestic as Central Africa is for political purposes. With _this_
arrangement the central keeping-room, lighted from above, may be as
large as a circus tent, and all the surrounding cells will be amply
supplied with light and air from the outside walls.

[Illustration: LOOKING TOWARD SUNSET.]

[Illustration: NEAR THE TURNING-POINT.]

"According to Aunt Melville's enthusiastic account, the construction of
the house is but little less than marvelous. 'The high walls of the
basement are built of those native, weather-stained and lichen-covered
boulders, the walls above being of a material hitherto unknown to
builders. You will scarcely believe it when I tell you they are nothing
else than the waste rubbish from brickyards, the rejected accumulations
of years--not by any means the unburned, but the overburned, the hard,
flinty, molten, misshapen and highly-colored masses of burned clay
which indeed refused to be consumed, but have been twisted into
shapeless blocks by the fervent heat. Of course, with such
unconventional materials for the main walls it would be a silly
affectation to embellish the exterior of the house with elaborate
mouldings or ornamental wood-work, and the visible details are
therefore plain to the verge of poverty. But as men of great genius can
disregard the trifling formalities of society, so there are no
architectural rules which this house is obliged to respect.'"

[Illustration: A CHOICE OF BALUSTERS.]

"That suits me perfectly," said Jack; "but I am amazed at Aunt
Melville. Never before did she make such a concession even to great
genius. Never before have I felt inclined to agree with her; but the
conviction has grown upon me of late that the new house is in danger of
being too much like other houses. If a fellow is really going in for
reform, I like to have him go the whole figure. What do you say to
beginning anew and building such a house as no mortal ever built
before--something to make everybody wonder what manner of people they
are who live in such a habitation--something to convince our neighbors
that we are no weak-minded time-servers, but are able to be an
architectural as well as domestic law unto ourselves--something to make
them stop and stare--a sort of local Greenwich from which the community
will reckon their longitude--'so many miles from the house that Jill
built'?"

"My dear, did it ever occur to you that you cannot be too thankful for
a wife who is not blown about by every wind of new doctrine? I _do_
like the plan of 'The Oaks' exceedingly, not only for itself, but for
the spirit of it, for its breadth and freedom. It seems to me a
charming illustration of the true gospel of home architecture. There is
no thoughtless imitation of something else that suits another place and
another family. Neither does it appear that the owner tried to make a
vain display for the sake of 'astonishing the natives.' He knew what he
wanted, and built the house to suit his wants, using the simplest, the
cheapest and the most durable materials at hand in the most direct and
unaffected manner. Did you notice in the sketch of the keeping-room
fireplace the little gallery passing across the end of the room above
the entrance to the sitting-room? Probably you thought that was built
for purely ornamental purposes, but it isn't. It is simply the walk
from the kitchen to another part of the attic, which can be most
conveniently reached by this interior bridge. Of course it adds to the
interest and beauty of the room, but it was not made for that purpose,
and, as I understand the matter, it is all the more beautiful because
it was first made to be useful. There is another thing in this
house--the elevator--which, queerly enough, we do not often find in
houses of more aspiring habit, where it would he of even greater value.
It is amazing to me that housekeepers will go on tugging trunks,
coal-hods and heavy merchandise of all kinds up stairways, day after
day and year after year, when a simple mechanical contrivance, moved by
water, or weights and pulleys, would save us from all these heavy
burdens. Think of the bruised knuckles, the trembling limbs that
stagger along with the upper end of a Saratoga 'cottage,' the broken
plastering at the sides, the paper patched with bright new pieces that
look 'almost worse' than the uncovered rents, and the ugly marks of
perspiring fingers."

[Illustration: THE BIG FIREPLACE IN THE KEEPING ROOM.]

[Illustration: ONE WAY TO BEGIN.]

"All of which I have seen and a part of which I have been," said Jack.
"I intended to have a lift in this house, but somehow it was left out."

"Our architect." Jill continued, "must be instructed to arrange not
only an easy staircase, but there must be a paneled wainscot at the
side. We will dispense with elegance in any other quarter, if need be,
in order to have the stairs ample, strong and well protected. I am not
over-anxious to have them ornate, although handsome stairs are very
charming if well placed; like many other beautiful things, they become
incurably ugly when too obtrusive. The architect has sent several
designs of balustrades from which we are to choose, and gives this
advice about the dimensions: 'As you have plenty of room, the staircase
should be four or four and a-half feet wide, so that two people can
easily walk over it abreast, I have arranged to make the steps twelve
inches wide, besides the projection that forms the finish--the
"nosing"--and six inches high; that is, six inches "rise" and twelve
inches "run." Some climbers think this too flat, and perhaps it is in
certain situations; but for homes, for easy, leisurely ascent by
children and old folks. I think it better than a steeper pitch. All
large dwelling-houses, and some small ones, ought to be supplied with
"passenger elevators," at least from the first to the second story.
Those who take the rooms still higher are usually able to make the
ascent in the common way. Such an elevator can undoubtedly be made that
will be safe and economical, especially where there is an ample water
supply.'"

[Illustration: A BROADSIDE OF AN EASY ASCENT.]

"The safety is the most troublesome part of the problem," said Jack;
"and I can think of no way to overcome the danger of walking off the
precipice, when the platform happens to be at the bottom, but by having
the car run up an inclined plane. There would be no more danger of
falling down this than down a common stairway, and the car might be
fixed so it couldn't move up or down faster than a walk or a slow
trot."

"Would you like to experiment in the new house? You may do so--at your
own expense--if you will promise not to spoil the plan. Among the
designs for the stairs there is one that will be of no service to
us--the screen at the foot of the stairs; our 'reception' hall will be
separated from the staircase hall by the chimney and the curtains at
the sides."

"I have an idea," exclaimed Jack, "a truly philanthropic one. You know
we are accumulating a large stock of plans, to say nothing of general
information on architectural subjects, which we cannot possibly use
ourselves, but which ought not to be wasted. Now you know Bessie is
pining for a mission.".

"Bessie has gone home."

"I know, but she will come back if we send for her and tell her that
she and Jim are to be sent out in the express wagon on a benevolent
expedition to the heathens--the uncultured domestic heathens. We can
have some of the architect's letters printed in tract form for them to
distribute, and they can take along these superfluous plans to be
applied where they will be most effective. Take, for instance, this
hall screen, or whatever it may be, with the square staircase behind
it. This would be just the thing for one of those old-fashioned square
houses with the hall running through the middle and the long staircase
splitting the hall in two lengthwise. If Bessie could persuade the
owner of a single one of these old houses to take out the straight and
narrow stairs, move them back, and, by introducing this semblance of a
separation, make a reception hall of the front part, she would feel
that she had not lived in vain. If she could at the same time cause
cashmere shawls and rag carpets to be hung as portières in place of
doors to the front rooms she would be ready for translation."

Jill laughed. "I'm not sure," said she, "but this is a good field for
people of missionary proclivities. Some of these old-fashioned houses
have far more real, artistic excellence than those of the later,
transition periods, and need but slight alterations to be most
satisfactory types of architectural beauty as well as models of comfort
and convenience. Broad, easy stairs, wide doorways and generous
windows, with ample porches and piazzas outside, would transform them
and make them not merely as good as new, but vastly better. Reopening
fireplaces that have been ignominiously bricked up would be another
promising field."

"Oh! I tell you my idea is a capital one. I'll send for Bess this very
day. They shall have Bob and the express wagon a week if they want it.
They shall dispense an esthetic gospel and accumulate ancient
bric-a-brac to their hearts' content. Bessie will be in ecstacies, and
Jim will be in a helpless state of amazement and admiration."

[Illustration: A DIVIDING SCREEN AT THE FOOT OF THE STAIRS.]

"How perfectly absurd, Jack! I wouldn't allow those children to go off
on such an excursion for all the old houses in America. One would
think you were determined to have an esthetic sister-in-law at all
hazards."

"Never thought of such a thing! But now that you suggest it--"

"I haven't suggested it," said Jill indignantly.

"Well, you put it into my head at all events, and really now it
wouldn't be such a bad idea. Jim is behind the times, artistically
speaking, and needs to be waked up; and as for Bess, she would very
soon learn to be careful how she expressed a longing for the
unattainable, for Jim is a practical fellow, and whatever she wanted he
would go for in a twinkling. Honestly, Jill, it strikes me as a
first-class notion, and I'm glad you suggested it."

"I _didn't_ suggest it, and I think it would be a _dreadful_ thing--I
mean to send them off on another excursion. I am not sure, however, but
we might found an A.B.C.A.M. with the materials and implements in our
possession."




CHAPTER XVII.

THE RIGHT SIDE OF PAINT; A PROTEST AND A PROMISE.


Jack's benevolent ambition to distribute their superfluous plans among
those in need of such aids was strengthened by the receipt of another
roll of drawings, showing designs for the interior work, wainscots,
cornices, architraves, paneled ceilings and such wood finishings as are
commonly found in houses that are built in conventional fashion, with
lathed and plastered walls, trimmed at all corners and openings with
wood more or less elaborately wrought. Of course, it was a large
condescension in the architect to offer such a variety, and contrary to
his avowed determination to decide without appeal all questions of
construction and design, but he appreciated his clients and knew when
to break his own rules and when to insist upon their observance. If
Jill, had required an assortment he would doubtless have suggested that
certain "practical" builders could furnish a full line of ready-made
"artistic" patterns for little more than the cost of the paper on which
they were printed; from these he would have advised her to select her
own designs, as she might have chosen from a medicine chest
sweet-smelling drops or sugar-coated pills of varying hue and
form--the result would doubtless he as satisfactory in one case as in
the other. Since she had not demanded it as an inalienable right he
gave her an opportunity to criticise and select, which she accepted by
no means unwillingly. As a rule, the designs were, in her opinion, too
elaborate and obtrusive. There were too many mouldings, there was too
much carving, and too evident a purpose to provide a finish that should
challenge attention by its extent or elegance. It would require too
much labor to keep it in order, and--it would cost too much. If she
could not have work that was truly artistic, and therefore enduringly
beautiful, whatever changes of fashion might occur, it was her wish to
keep all the essential part of the building and finish modestly in the
background, not attempting to make it ornamental, but relying upon the
furniture for whatever conspicuous ornament or decoration might be
desired. Nothing annoyed her more than an elegantly-finished house
scantily provided with shabby, incongruous and misapplied furniture.
The amiable concession of the architect came near causing a fatal
quarrel, as amiable concessions are apt to do, for he found it almost
impossible to satisfy Jill's taste in the direction of simplicity; he
seemed to feel that he was neglecting his duty if he gave her plain,
narrow bands of wood absolutely devoid of all design beyond a
designation of their width and thickness. Any carpenter's boy could
make such plans. "It would be worse," he wrote, "than prescribing bread
pills and 'herb drink' for a sick man." To which Jill replied in
substance that the needs of the patient are more important than
professional rules.

[Illustration: BITS OF CORNICES.]

Over the first great question, regarding the visible wood work of the
interior, Jack and Jill had held many protracted discussions: should
any of it be painted, or should all the wood be left to show its
natural graining and color? To the argument that unpainted wood is not
only "natural" but strictly genuine and more interesting than paint,
Jack replied that "natural" things are not always beautiful; that
paint, which makes no pretense of being anything but paint, is as
genuine as shellac or varnish, and that if the object is to be
interesting, the bark, the knots, the worm-holes, and, if possible, the
worms themselves should be displayed. "Besides," said he, "if we decide
on hard wood, who shall choose the kinds? There's beech, birch and
maple; cherry, whitewood and ebony; ash and brown ash and white ash and
black ash; ditto oak, drawn and quartered; there's rosewood, redwood,
gopherwood and wormwood; mahogany, laurel, holly and mistletoe; cedar
of Lebanon and pine of Georgia, not to mention chestnut, walnut,
butternut, cocoanut and peanut, all of which are popular and available
woods for finishing modern dwellings. If we choose from this list,
which may be indefinitely extended, the few kinds for which we can find
room in our house, we shall be tormented with regret as long as we both
do live because we didn't choose something else. Now if we paint,
behold how simple a thing it is! We buy a lot of white pine boards, put
them up where they belong and paint them in whatever unnamable hues the
prevailing fashion may chance to dictate. Our boards need not even be
of the best quality; an occasional piece of sound sap, a few hard
knots, or now and then a 'snoodledog'--as they say in Nantucket--would
do no harm. A prudent application of shellac and putty before painting
will make everything right. Then if the fashions change, or if we
should be refined beyond our present tastes and wish to go up higher,
all we should need to lift the house to the same elevated plane
is--another coat of paint. On the other hand, if we had a room finished
in old English oak, growing blacker and blacker every year; in mahogany
or in cheap and mournful black walnut, what could we do if the
imperious mistress of the world should decree light colors? With rare,
pale, faded tints on the walls our strong, bold, heavy hard-wood finish
would be painful in the extreme. We couldn't change the wood and we
couldn't change the fashion."

"If you were not my own husband, Jack, I should say you were dreadfully
obtuse. Concerning _fashions_ in house-building and furnishing I feel
very much as Martin Luther felt about certain, formal religious dogmas.
If we are asked to respect them as a matter of amiable compliance, if
we find them convenient, agreeable and at the same time harmless, then
let us quietly accept them; but, if we are commanded to obey them as
vital, if they are set before us as solemn obligations to be reverenced
as we reverence the everlasting truth, then, for Heaven's sake, let us
tear them in pieces and trample them under our feet, lest we lose our
power to distinguish the substance from the shadow. The moment any
particular style of building, finishing or furnishing becomes a
recognized fashion, that moment I feel inclined to turn against it with
all my might."

"If you were not my own idolized wife, I should say that was 'pure
cussedness.'"

[Illustration: MOULDINGS FAIR TO SEE, BUT HARD TO KEEP CLEAN.]

"On the contrary, it is high moral principle; that is, moral principle
applied to art. It is a simple, outright impossibility for human
beings to have any true perception of art while a shadow of a thought
of fashion remains. It is, indeed, possible that fashion may, for a
moment, follow the straight and narrow road that leads to artistic
excellence, as the fitful breath of a cyclone may, at a certain point
in its giddy whirl, run parallel with the ceaseless sweep of the mighty
trade-winds, but whoever tries to keep constantly in its track is sure
to be hopelessly astray."

"My dear, indignant, despiser of fashion, you know you wouldn't wear a
two-year-old bonnet to church, on a pleasant Sunday morning, for the
price of a pew in the broad aisle."

"Certainly not; that would be both mercenary and irreverent; moreover,
my bonnet has nothing to do with artistic rules. It is not a work of
art or of science, of nature or of grace. It is a conventional signal
by which I announce a friendly disposition toward the follies of my
fellow-creatures--a sort of flag of truce, a badge of my conformity in
little things. I wear it voluntarily and could lay it aside if I
chose."

"Undoubtedly, _if_ you chose. Now, let us resume the original
discussion. I had given one powerful argument in favor of paint when I
was rashly interrupted: here is another--it is much cheaper."

"That would depend," said Jill. "Ash, butternut, cherry and various
other woods cost little, if any more, than the best pine, and the pine
itself is very pretty for chambers."

"Ah, but you forget the labor question. It is one thing to join two
pieces of wood so closely as to leave no visible crack between them,
and quite another to bring them into the same neighborhood, fill the
chasm with putty and hide the whole under a coat of paint. The
difference between these two kinds of joints is the difference between
one stroke and two, between one day's work and five days, between one
thousand dollars and five thousand. My third argument you will surely
appreciate. Paint is more artistic." Here Jack paused to give his
words effect; then proceeded like one walking on stilts. "Pure tones
symphoniously gradated from contralto shadows to the tender brightness
of the upper registers and harmoniously blended with the prevailing
quality--"

[Illustration: FRAGMENTS OF ARCHITRAVES.]

"Oh, Jack! _Don't_ go any farther, you are already beyond your depth.
When you attempt to quote Bessie's sentiments you should have her
letter before you. Perhaps I have a dim perception of the principle
that underlies your thirdly. If so, this room is a pertinent
illustration of it. Instead of all this white paint, if the wood work
had been colored to match the predominant tint in the background of the
paper, or a trifle darker, this being also the general 'tone' of the
carpet, it is easy to see how the coloring of the room would have been
simple and pleasing, instead of glaring and ugly. Yes, your plea for
paint is not without value. I think, however, it would be entirely
possible to stain the unpainted wood to produce any desired symphony,
fugue or discord. It might be unnatural, especially if we wished to
look blue, but it would not conceal the marking and shading of the
grain of the wood which is so much prettier than any moulding or
carving, and vastly easier to keep in order. Your economical arguments
are always worth considering. I think the happy compromise for us will
be to use hard wood in the first story and painted pine in the
chambers, with various combinations and exceptions. The bath-rooms,
halls and dressing-rooms of the second story should of course be
without paint, and we may relieve the solid monotony of the hardwood
finish with occasional fillets or bands of color, painted panels or
any other irregularities we choose to invent. But this is invading the
mighty and troublous realm of 'interior decoration,' from which I had
resolved to keep at a respectful distance until the house is at least
definitely planned in all its details."

[Illustration: A CHOICE OF WAINSCOTS.]

A wise decision, for although what we call in a general way "interior
decoration" is closely allied to essential construction--not
infrequently seems to be a part of it--there is still a sharp though
often unseen line between them that cannot be crossed with impunity.
Artistic construction is at best only second cousin to decoration, and
while we may in building arrange to accommodate a certain style of
furniture or ornament, as Bessie's friend built her parlor to suit the
rug, the result of such contriving is apt to be discouraging if not
disastrous.

"Two things we must surely have," said Jill, "which the architect has
not sent; one, an old fashion, the other, a new one. We must have
'chair rails,' in every room down stairs that has not a solid wainscot,
if I have to make the plans and put them up myself. We must also have
another band of wood higher up entirely around every room in both
stories, to which the pictures can be hung."

"Perhaps the architect will object to this as interfering with his
plans."

"He cannot, for they belong to our side of the house; they are matters
of use, not of design. He may put them where he pleases, within
reasonable limits, and make them of any pattern, with due regard to
cost. He may treat one as part of the dado, the other as a member of
the cornice, if he chooses, but we _must_ have them--they are
indispensable."

"They are also dangerous, because they are fashionable."

"Yes, an illustration of the temporary agreement of fashion and common
sense. But things of real worth do not go out of fashion; fashion goes
out of them; henceforth they live by their own merit and no one
questions their right to be."

"Have you written to Bessie?"

"Written to Bessie? What for?"

"Why, to come and get ready to start on her mission."

"No, indeed; I supposed you had forgotten that absurd notion."

"Not at all absurd. I mentioned it to Jim, and he was delighted.
Offered to go up and escort her down. He said they could go out in a
different direction every day and do a great deal of good in the course
of a week."

"Jack, I am ashamed of you! Don't mention the subject to me again."

"What shall I say to Jim?"

[Illustration: WOOD PANELS FOR WALLS AND CEILINGS, WITH IRREGULARITIES
IN LEATHER, PAINT AND PAPER.]

"You needn't say anything to Jim. Tell him I am going to invite Bessie
to visit us in the new house, and if he is in this part of the world I
will send for him at the same time."

"And that will be a full year, for the house is hardly begun."

"Yes, a full year."

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE HOUSE FINISHED AND THE HOME BEGUN.


It was indeed a full year for Jill before Bessie received the promised
invitation. Not merely full as to its complement of days, but full of
new cares, interests and activities. It is needless to say it was also
a happy year. Building a house for a home is a healthful experience, a
liberal education to one who can give personal attention to it; who has
some knowledge of plans with enough imagination to have a fair
conception of what they will be when executed; who is content to
receive a reasonable return for a given outlay, not anxious to get the
best end of every bargain, nor over-fearful of being cheated; who cares
more for home comfort than for a fine display, and whose soul is never
vexed by the comments of Mrs. Grundy, nor tormented by the decrees of
fashion.

The question was raised, whether the house should be built by contract
or by "day's work." The worldly-wise friends advised the former.
Otherwise they affirmed the cost of the house would exceed the
appropriation by fifty, if not a hundred, per cent., since it would be
for the interest of both architect and builders to make the house as
costly and the job as long as possible. And, while it was doubtless
true that "day work" is likely to be better than "job work," still, if
the plans and specifications were clearly drawn and the contract made
as strong as the pains and penalties of the law could make it, the
contractor might be compelled to keep his agreement and furnish
"first-class" work.

Jill's father settled this point at once. "It is true," said he, "that
the plans and specifications should be clearly drawn, that you may see
the end from the beginning, and it will be well to carefully estimate
the cost, lest, having begun to build, you should be unable to finish.
But I am neither willing to hold any man to an agreement, however
legal it may be, that requires him to give me more than I have paid
for, nor, on the other hand, do I wish to pay him more than a fair
value for his work and material. You cannot avoid doing one of these
two things in contracting such work as your house, for it is
impossible to estimate its cost with perfect accuracy, and no
specifications, however binding, can draw a well-defined line between
'first' and 'second'-class work. A general contract may be the least
of a choice of evils in some cases; it is not so in yours. If you know
just what you want, the right mode of securing it is to hire honest,
competent workmen and pay them righteous wages. If, before the work is
completed, you find the cost has been underestimated, stop when your
money is spent. It may be mortifying and inconvenient to live in an
unfinished house; it is far more so to be burdened with debt or an
uneasy conscience. There is another thing to be remembered: We hear
loud lamentations over the dearth of skillful, trusty laborers. There
is no way of promoting intelligent, productive industry--which is
the basis of all prosperity--but by employing artisans in such a way
that the personal skill and fidelity of each one shall have their
legitimate reward. The contract system, as usually practiced, acts in
precisely an opposite direction. Your house must be built 'by the day'
Jill, or I shall recall my gift." _That_ question was settled. The
good and wise man had previously decided as peremptorily an early
query relating to the plans. When it was known that a new house was to
be built, several architects, with more conceit than self-respect,
proposed to offer plans "in open competition"--not to be paid for
unless accepted--concerning which Jill had asked her father's advice.

[Illustration: THE HOUSE THAT JILL BUILT.]

"What should you think of a physician," said he, "who, on hearing that
you were ill, should hasten to present himself with a prescription and
a bottle of medicine, begging you to read the one, test the other, and,
if they made a favorable impression, give him the job of curing you?
There are such who call themselves physicians; other people call them
quacks, and there is one place for their gratuitous offerings--the
fire. I shall burn any plans that are presented in this way. Choose
your architect at the outset, and give him all possible aid in carrying
out your wishes, but do not employ one of those who must charge a
double price for their actual work in order to work for nothing half
the time. In any other business such a practice would be condemned at
once."

"Isn't it the same thing as offering samples of goods?"

"No, it is offering the goods themselves--the top of the barrel at
that."

Of course this did not apply to the contributions that were prompted by
personal friendship, of which Jill, as we have seen, received her full
share, none of them, excepting the one-story plan, proving in the least
tempting.

As the race of competent, industrious mechanics is not yet extinct,
whatever the croakers may say such were found to build the house, which
was well closed in before winter. The walls and roof were completed and
the plastering dried while the windows could be left open without
danger of freezing, a most important thing, because although mortar may
be kept from freezing by artificial heat, the moisture it contains,
unless expelled from the house, will greatly retard the "seasoning" of
the frame and the walls of the building. After it has all been blown
out of the windows, if the house is kept warm and dry the fine
wood-finishing will "keep its place" best if put up in winter rather
than in summer. For the most carefully seasoned and kiln-dried lumber
will absorb moisture so rapidly in the hot, steaming days of June and
in the damp dog-day weather that no joiner's skill can prevent cracks
from appearing when the dry furnace heat has drawn the moisture from
its pores.

One year is a reasonable length of time for building a common
dwelling-house. Twelve months from the day the workmen appeared to dig
the foundation trenches the last pile of builder's rubbish was taken
away and the new, clean, bright, naked, empty house stood ready for the
first load of furniture. If the social and domestic tastes of Jack and
Jill have been even slightly indicated, it is unnecessary to say that
this first load did not consist of the brightest and best products of
the most fashionable manufacturers. Aunt Melville had sent a few
ornaments and two or three elegant trifles in the way of furniture, a
chair or two in which no one could sit without danger of mutual broken
limbs, and a table that, like many another frail beauty, might enjoy
being supported but could never bear any heavier burden than a
card-basket, and was liable to be upset by the vigorous use of
dust-brush or broom. "They will help to furnish your rooms," said the
generous aunt, "and will give a certain style that cannot be attained
with furniture that is simply useful."

[Illustration: THE FIRST FLOOR OF THE HOUSE THAT JILL BUILT.]

The ornaments that were ornamental and nothing more Jill accepted
gratefully. The furniture that must be protected to preserve its
beauty, and generally avoided lest it should be broken, she returned,
begging her aunt to give it to some one having a larger house.

On one of those perfect days that are so rare, even in June, Bessie
appeared in all the glory of the lilies. To Jill's surprise, her first
remark after the customary effusive greeting was, "How _lovely_ it is
to have a home of your own. I shouldn't care if it was made of slabs
and shaped like a wigwam. Of course, _this_ house is exquisite. I knew
it would be, but it is ten times as large as I should want. It will be
_so_ much work to take care of it."

"I don't expect to take care of it alone."

"I know you don't, but I should want to take care of my own house, if I
had one, every bit of it. Oh, you needn't look so amazed. I know what I
am saying. I have learned to cook, and dust, and sweep, and kindle
fires, and polish, silver, and--and black stoves!"

No wonder Jill was dumb while Bessie went on at a breathless rate.

"And do you know, Jill dear, I wouldn't take this house if you would
give it to me. There! I would a thousand times rather have a little bit
of a cottage, just large enough for--for two people, and everything in
it just as cosy and simple as it could be. Then we--then I could learn
to paint and decorate--I've learned a little already--and embroider and
such things, and slowly, very slowly, you know, I would fill the house
with pretty things that would belong to it and be a part of it, and a
part of me, too, because I made them."

"Wouldn't it be much cheaper and better to hire some skillful artist to
do these things?" said Jill, taking refuge in matter-of-fact.

[Illustration: THE SECOND FLOOR OF THE HOUSE THAT JILL BUILT.]

"If I hired any one of course it would be an artist, but our homes are
not dear to us because they are beautiful, it is because they are
_ours_, because we have worked for them and in them until they are a
part of ourselves. I love artistic things as well as I ever did, but
there are some things that are ten thousand times lovelier."

Before Jill had recovered from her astonishment at Bessie's transformed
sentiments or imagined their cause, who should drive up but Aunt
Jerusha. She and Bessie had never met before, but the mysterious laws
of affinity, that pay no regard to outward circumstances or
expectations, brought them at once into the warmest sympathy. Jill had
provided extremely pretty china for her table, and for Bessie's sake
had brought out certain rare pieces not intended for every-day use. It
was contrary to her rule to make any difference between "every-day" and
"company days." "Nothing is too good for Jack," was the basis of her
argument. The one exception was china. But Bessie was absolutely
indifferent to the frail and costly pottery. She was intent on learning
domestic wisdom from Aunt Jerusha, and insisted upon writing in her
note-book the recipes for everything she ate and recording the rules
for carrying on whatever household matters chanced to be mentioned,
from waxing floors to canning tomatoes. Jack strove to enliven the
conversation by throwing in elaborate remarks upon the true sphere of
women, the uncertainty of matrimonial ventures and the deceitfulness of
mankind in general. Jill meanwhile preserved her equanimity upon all
points relating to her house. She admitted the force of Aunt
Jerusha's suggestion that a portion of the long serving-table in the
kitchen should be movable and a door made from kitchen to china-closet,
to be kept locked, as a rule, but available in an emergency, when one
or both servants were sick or discharged; she appreciated her advice to
form the habit of washing the silver and fine glasses with her own
hands before leaving the table; she was able to repeat her favorite
recipes correctly; she carved gracefully, as a lady ought, and gave due
attention to her guests. Beyond these duties she was in a state of
bewilderment. What had happened to Bessie, and what new mischief Jack
was incubating were puzzles she could neither solve nor dismiss.

[Illustration: THE EAST END OF JILL'S DINING-ROOM.]

By one of those coincidences, not half as rare as they seem, at four
o'clock the same day Aunt and Uncle Melville appeared upon the scene.
They were spending a short time at a summer hotel in the vicinity, and
Jill persuaded them to stay for tea, sending their carriage back for
Cousin George and his wife, who were at the same place. She also
invited her father and mother to improve the opportunity to make a
small family gathering. "I suppose you know Jim is coming over this
evening," said Jack. "Don't you think he had better bring Uncle Harry
along?"

"I _didn't_ know Jim was coming, but he is always welcome, and Uncle
Harry too. Your father and mother, of course, if they are able to come
out this evening."

"Oh, _they_ are coming, anyway," Jack began and stopped suddenly. "That
is, I mean, certainly they will be delighted, if you send for them."

Jill was more puzzled than ever, but they all came.

"Now, you will please consider yourselves a 'board of visitors,'" said
she, as they sat at the table after tea, "authorized to inspect this
institution and report your impressions."

"Remembering that Jill is the warden and I am the prisoner," said Jack.

"But you must conduct us to the cells," said her father, rising, "and
tell us what to admire."

Jill accordingly began at the beginning. She showed them the light
vestibule, with a closet at one side for umbrellas and overshoes, and a
seat at the other; the central hall that would be used as a common
reception-room, and on such occasions as the present, would become a
part of one large apartment--the entire first floor of the main house;
the staircase with the stained-glass windows climbing the side; the
toilet-room from the garden entrance and the elevator reaching from the
basement to the attic. She showed them the family suite of rooms; her
own in the southeast corner, with the dressing-room and adjoining
chamber toward the west, and Jack's room over the front hall, with the
large guest-room above the dining-room. She urged them to count the
closets and notice their ample size; referred with pride to the
servants' rooms, and explained how there was space in the roof for two
chambers and a billiard-room, if they should ever want them. With true
housekeeper's pride she declared the beauties and wonders of the
kitchen arrangements, a theme that had been often rehearsed, and from
the kitchen they descended to the basement, which contained the
well-lighted laundry, the servants' bath-room and store-rooms without
name or number; some warm and sunny, others cool and dark, but all dry
and well ventilated.

Then they returned to the drawing-room to make their reports.

"It's too large," said Bessie.

"It isn't small enough," said Jim.

"The third floor is not the proper place for a billiard-table,"
remarked Uncle Melville, sententiously. "It is too remote for such a
social pastime; too difficult of access; too--too--er--"

"The house looks smaller than it is," said Aunt Melville, "which I
consider a serious defect. It ought to look larger; it should have a
tower, and the front door should be toward the street."

"Your chambers are excellent," said Uncle Harry. "The personality of
human beings should be respected. The chief object of home is to give
to each individual a chance for unfettered development. Every soul is a
genius at times and feels the necessity of isolation. Especially do we
need to be alone in sleep, and to this end every person in a house is
entitled to a separate apartment. I commend the family suite."

"A nobby house," said Cousin George.

"I like our own better," said his wife, _sotto voce_, which was a
worthy sentiment and should have been openly expressed. Fondness for
our own is the chief of domestic virtues.

"Is it paid for?" inquired Jack's father. To which Jack replied:

"It is: and the house that I built is sold to the most stylish people
you ever saw. They paid me more than this cost, but I wouldn't swap
with them for a thousand dollars to boot."

"No; neither would they change with us for two thousand."

Just as the clock struck nine the door-bell rang and the rector and his
wife were announced. Before Jill could realize what was taking place
she found herself an amazed and helpless spectator in her own house,
for Jim and Bessie stood side by side under the curtains leading to the
library, and the rector was reading the solemn marriage service. By way
of calming her excitement Jack found a chance to whisper to Jill,

"They have been engaged six months."

"You unnatural husband! Why didn't you tell me?"

"Didn't know it myself till this afternoon."

There was no time for further explanations, for the good rector was
saying: "I am sure you will agree with me that building and cherishing
a consecrated home is the noblest work we can do on earth. From such
homes spring all public and private excellence, all patriotic virtues,
all noble charities and philanthropies, all worthy service of God and
man. Whether high or low, rich or poor, in all times and in all places,
domestic life, in its purity and strength, is the safeguard of
individuals and the bulwark of nations. And when, in after years,
other solemn sacraments shall be performed beneath this roof, may it
still be found a sacred temple of peace and love!"

Bessie and Jim kept house in two chambers until a cottage of four
rooms, with an attic and wood-shed, was finished, which happened before
cold weather. Her wedding present from Jack was an express wagon full
of obsolete household utensils. She had learned to make the fire in the
kitchen, and nothing was more acceptable than such a load of dry
kindling wood.

The house that Jill built cost ten thousand dollars. Jim's cost less
than one thousand. Bessie declares that the smaller the house the
greater the happiness it contains. She may be right, but Jill denies
it, and it is never safe to draw general conclusions from special
cases.




CHAPTER XIX.

TEN YEARS AFTER.


Jack, Jr., and his sister Bessie, were building block houses on the
piazza. Jack was pretending to read the evening paper, in reality
watching the builders; and Jill was making no pretense of doing
anything else.

"Really Jack, I think Bessie shows more skill in building than her
brother. Her houses look like realities, and they have more grace and
dignity than his."

"Of course. Haven't I always said that women would make the best
architects if they had a fair chance? Didn't you make the plans of this
house? Hasn't it been all our fancy painted and a great deal more?
There isn't a stick nor a stone, a brick nor a shingle that I would
have changed if we were to build it again."

"And haven't I always said that men were more conservative than women?
_I_ would be glad to change everything there is in the house to build
it all over again, and build it differently."

"Oh the inconstancy of women! Even the moon is more constant, for her
changes are only superficial and temporary."

"When I say; 'I have changed my mind,' it is only another way of
saying, 'I am wiser to-day than I was yesterday.'"

"I understand; what a Jacob's ladder of wisdom you must be! All right;
change your mind every day, grow wiser and wiser; I will try to keep
the hem of your garments in sight."

"Have you selected a lot?"

"What for?"

"For a new house."

"Bless you, my dear husband, I wouldn't build another house, still less
live in it, for all the wealth of the treasury vaults. Isn't this our
own? Hasn't it always been perfectly suited to our wants? What upon
earth are you thinking of?"

"Oh, nothing in particular. I never think if I can help it. I have
heard that a man ought always to build two houses, one to learn how,
the second to correct the mistakes of the first. I thought perhaps it
was the same way with women."

"This house was exactly right when it was built, it could not have been
improved, but that was ten years ago, and a great many things have
happened in the last ten years; but, then, a great many more will
happen in the next ten, and ten years hence there will be just as many
things to change in the houses that are built this year as there are
now in those that are of the same age as ours."

"But how would you change this house if it could be done by a magic
wand or by the exercise of faith, and without raising a speck of dust
or upsetting the housekeeping affairs for a single minute?"

"I would make it larger for one thing. Our rooms are too small. The
number of rooms a house contains should depend on the number of people
there are to live in it, including all the children, the guests and the
servants, with a certain allowance for contingencies."

"Depending on the hospitality of the family."

"Yes; and whatever the number of rooms, they should be large enough,
not merely to hold the occupants when the doors are shut, but for
comfortable living and moving about. There is nothing in which all men
and women are more conservative than in the planning of their houses;
there seems to be something hereditary about it, as difficult to change
as a tendency to bald heads and awkward locomotion. Americans are
special sufferers in this respect. The primitive Anglo-American home
was only a step removed from the wigwams of the aboriginal savages, in
size, shape and general accommodations. Even our English ancestors,
from whom we derived some of our domestic notions, were not accustomed
to anything magnificent in the way of dwellings. The climate was
against them, and they were not sufficiently luxurious in their tastes.
Their houses were primarily places for shelter and refuge. In summer
they lived out of doors, and in winter they crept into close quarters
and waited for warm weather. With plenty of land and building materials
to be had for the taking, our colonial grandfathers should have had the
most generous homes in the world."

"Yes; and to judge by some of the old colonial mansions which have
escaped the 'making-over' vandals we have been going backwards in that
respect during the last fifty or a hundred years."

"Yes; and we ought to have been going the other way, for the size of
rooms should increase as the cost of furniture diminishes. Take for
instance, a parlor or sitting room fifteen feet square, which is, I
believe, about the orthodox size for a modern house. Give such a room a
dozen straight-backed and straight-legged chairs ranged along the
sides, a table in the center of the room with a green cover and four
books on it, two or three unhappy-looking family portraits on the
walls, a pair of brass candlesticks on the high, wooden mantel, a pair
of bellows, a shovel and tongs, with, perhaps, in the way of luxury, a
haircloth sofa. Now compare the room furnished in that way, which was
by no means uncommon in the days of our grandfathers with a room of the
same size, in which are stored half a dozen chairs, no two alike, and
some of them as large as small lounges, a center table piled with books
and magazines and photographs, till like a heap of jack straws, it is
impossible to remove one without disturbing the whole pile; a lounge
with a back, a divan or something without a back, an upright piano, two
or three bookcases, several small stools and piles of Turkish cushions
to catch the unwary, huge Japanese vases beside the fireplace, a
leopard skin with a solid head in front of the table, and a sprinkling
of Persian rugs spilt over the floor; a cabinet of bric-a-brac in the
northeast corner, a 'whatnot' with a big jardiniere bearing a
three-foot palm on the top story in the northwest, a carved bracket
with a sheaf of Florida grasses in the southeast, and a tall wooden
clock that won't go in the southwest; a brass tea kettle hanging from a
wrought iron frame beside a fragile stand that carries a half dozen of
still more fragile 'hand-painted' teacups and saucers; lambrequins and
heavy curtains at all the windows and most of the doors, a big
combination gas and electric chandelier suspended from the center of
the ceiling, bedangled with jumping jacks, Christmas cards, straw
ornaments and other artistic 'curious'; one or two small tables
scattered 'promiscous like' about the room; a music stand and a banjo;
with photographs, chromos, oil paintings, water colors and etchings,
from one to three feet square, in gilt, enameled and wooden frames of
all styles and degrees of fitness on the walls of the room,--take a
room furnished in this way or a great deal more so, and compare it
with another of the same actual dimensions furnished in the
old-fashioned way and see which is the larger. The modern furnishing
may be 'cozy,' oppressively cozy when there are half a dozen people
trying to move gracefully around and between it without upsetting or
destroying anything, but what sort of hospitality can we offer our
guests if they must be always afraid of breaking something valuable if
they stir?"

"Why not have a bonfire and liquidate some of this superfluous stock?"

"It is not superfluous; all these things, if they are good add to the
enjoyment of living, if we have room for them and are able to take good
care of them without neglecting weightier matters. Our own rooms are
not large enough. However, if we cannot enlarge them we can build new
ones for special purposes. For one, we must have a children's workroom.
If Jack is going to be an artist, and you know he shows decided talent,
and Bessie an architect, there's no doubt of her having real genius in
that direction, they should have one room immediately, and two by and
by, for their own exclusive use. A room where they could keep all their
books, and tools and toys, and where they could work in their own
spontaneous, untrammeled way."

"You mean a nursery."

"No, I do _not_ mean a nursery, but a workshop, study, gymnasium, call
it anything you please. The floor should be smooth and hard, and the
walls should be wainscoted with smooth, hard wood. There should be
blackboards and shelves at the sides, and the children should be
allowed to drive nails wherever they please. I am not sure but I would
have a sink and a water faucet."

"Not unless the room is in the cellar or has a floor tight enough for a
swimming tank. Well, what next?"

"We must have a hospital."

"For inebriates or the insane?"

"A room similar to the private wards in a hospital. You know our own
and the children's sleeping rooms are very simply furnished, but a sick
room should be still more severe. The children have both had the
measles, thank goodness, and I hope they never will have smallpox,
scarlet fever, or diphtheria, but if they should it would be necessary
to send them away from home or run the risk of their exposing one
another."

"You might as well include every other ill that flesh is heir to. If we
have got to fight germs day and night in order to live, the cleaner and
more open we can keep the battle ground the better. It strikes me that
it might be a good thing to have the whole house sort of clean and
wholesome."

"Of course. But none of us would like to have the living rooms as
absolutely bare of all superfluous furnishing as a hospital ward. We
should not be willing to give up our rugs, take down the curtains,
throw away the cushions and sit in hard wooden chairs."

"No, and I wouldn't like to burn my books, although there is nothing
quite so 'germy' as my musty old books that were made in Italy in
plague times and smell like the 16th century every time they are
opened. So I suppose we must have a hospital for the children to be
sick in, a workshop for them to work in, and what would you say to a
small chapel and penitentiary, with a dungeon or two? While we are
about it, let's have a market and cold storage annex."

"Precisely what I was going to suggest. It would be the easiest thing
in the world to attach a small room to the cellar or the kitchen, where
a low temperature can be kept at all times, either by ice or by the
artificial refrigeration that will soon be distributed and sold in the
same way that gas, water, steam, electric light and power are now
furnished in many cities."

"I never thought of it before, but why shouldn't milk and beer and
other medicinal drinks be distributed in the same way as water and
gas?"

"Please don't interrupt me. These are really serious considerations.
Why, Jack, we haven't begun to guess at the wonderful changes that are
to be made in all our housekeeping affairs, as well as in everything
else by electricity. In a few years we shall find our present cooking
arrangements as much out of date as the old turnspit and tin ovens and
the great wood fires on the hearth. And light! Our houses will be as
light as day all the time, unless we choose darkness in order to sleep
more comfortably."

"Or because our deeds be evil, or for the better accommodation of
burglars. No self-respecting burglar would think of 'burgling' without
a dark lantern."

"And heat; do you remember how something more than twenty-five years
ago a French scientist proposed to supply all the heat needed for human
comfort in cold climates directly from the sun's rays?"

"I can't say that I do remember that particular philosopher, but I have
a notion that the sun was considered a fair sort of furnace a good many
years before the first Frenchman was born."

"Yes, yes; but he was going to gather the sun's heat into such shape
that it would warm our houses in winter, do all the cooking, take the
place of all the steam boilers and furnaces. I never heard that his
theories were reduced to practice, but we have found another source of
light and heat that is already under our control. There is no more
doubt that all the warmth, illumination and mechanical power that we
can use are within our reach, when we have learned how to take
possession of them, than there is of gravitation. It is all waiting at
the door, we have only to clap our hands and the potent spirit is ready
to do our bidding."

"Without money and without price?"

"No, not quite that, there are too many incorporated monopolies in the
way. But it is coming nearer and nearer, and with the unlimited power
of wind and waves and waterfalls, all these things will soon be as
cheap as anything really worth having ought to be."

"Say, Jill, do you suppose we shall live to see all our necessities
supplied, gratis, and have nothing to work for except the luxuries?"

"We have lived long enough to find that for most people in our day and
generation, even for those who think they have to work very hard 'just
to get a living,' their most serious toil is to provide, what might be
called, not the 'bare' necessities of life, but the well-dressed
necessities. But it is time for those children to be in bed."




CHAPTER XX.

A DOUBLE CONCLUSION.


"Now Jill," this was half an hour later, the children were asleep and
the gas was lighted, "let us by way of amusement draw plans of a castle
in Spain. Let us forget all the houses that ever were built and fancy
ourselves, not Adam and Eve, with the responsibility of setting the
housekeeping pace for the rest of the human family nor Robinson Crusoe,
whose domestic arrangements were somewhat handicapped, but a wise pair
of semi-Bourbons, at the end of the 19th century, who forget nothing
old but are willing to learn and adopt anything new, provided it is
good."

"All right; go ahead."

"In the first place our castle will not be destructible by fire or
water. All the walls will be of masonry and the floor beams will be of
steel. There will be nothing to invite moth or rust."

"Nor burglars; not so much as a silver spoon or a candlestick."

"I have always been sorry that the roof of this house was not
fireproof, but I suppose it would have cost too much, though the
architect said it might have been made like the floors if we would
consent to have it flat."

"Moral: if you want a roof of the mountainous variety you must either
pay for it or run the risk of being burned out on top. But what do
castles in Spain care for the cost? We can have fireproof roofs in
miniature copy of Alpine peaks or we can use them for billiard tables
and croquet grounds."

"Really," Jill continued, "there is no good reason for steep roofs.
Snow is more troublesome on the ground around the house than on top of
it, if it will stay there, and a very slight slope will carry off the
rain. I fancy steep roofs must have been invented when builders used
such clumsy materials for covering that they were obliged to lay them
on a steep pitch in order to keep out the water. Shingles of course
last longer the steeper the roof."

"If that's the case they ought to last forever on the second story
walls of our house, where they are straight up and down. When you come
to think of it, high roofs must be built now-a-days mainly for show,
incidentally they cover the house. First beautiful, then useful. How
large will it be?"

"What, the roof?"

"No, the whole thing; how many rooms will it have?"

"That will depend on the size of the family. Not less than ten nor more
than forty. Ten rooms will answer for two people, and more than forty
complicates the housekeeping."

"Do you count closets?"

"Oh, no. Closets and dressing rooms, storerooms, bath rooms, cupboards
and things of that sort, are mere adjuncts. They are to the real rooms
what the pockets are to a suit of clothes."

"Excellent. I'm glad we haven't got to count the closet or the expense.
Probably ten rooms are not too many for two young people, but a pair of
childless octogenarians ought to get along with eight or nine; the
other way you are all right, only I would say four hundred. While we
are about it, let's have a comfortable, good sized, 'roomy' house. But
how do you propose to put even forty rooms with their various pockets
under one roof and give them all plenty of sunlight and fresh air? Will
you pile them up one above another or set them in a row on the ground?
In either case it would need a trolly car and a telephone to connect
the two ends of the line."

"It mustn't be more than two stories high, and I'm not sure but one
would be better."

"That means twenty rooms on each floor. The rooms will average twenty
feet long, and that will make the entire length of our castle four or
five hundred feet. Won't it look like an institution or a row of
tenements if it is strung out in a line?"

"It will not be."

"Cut up into wings and things?"

"No, it will be in the form of a hollow square. There may be a wing or
two on one side or another, and wherever a projecting bay or oriel will
add to the comfort or charm of the interior we shall have one, but its
general form will be a great square with an open court in the center."

"Oh, I see. An imitation Pompeian, or Florentine palace."

"No, nothing of the kind. Not an imitation of anything. It will be a
simple, straightforward, common-sense, American home, with room for a
good-sized family, several rooms for extra occasions, and some that
will not be finished at all but held in reserve for future
contingencies. It sometimes costs no more to enclose a certain space in
building than to leave it outside, and there is the same satisfaction
in knowing we have space to spare inside the house that there is in
owning the land that joins us even when we don't expect to sell or use
it."

"What shall we do with the big hole in the center? It will be too small
for golf or tennis, and too big for a conservatory. We might keep
hens."

"It will not be too large for a garden, with fountains for hot weather
and flowers for cold. It will be its own excuse for being, for it will
give light and air to all the rooms, and if it has a glass roof the
problem of comfortable living in cold weather will be solved. There
will always be the temperate zone at one side of the house,--that is
inside the court,--however high the drifts may be piled outside. Of
course the entire building will be warmed in winter and cooled in
summer by spicy breezes driven by electric fans, and we shall only have
to decide what temperature we prefer on different days of the week, set
the gauge, and there will be no more watching of the thermometer, the
registers, the weather reports or the wood pile."

"But I thought it was wrong to live in a river of warm air. Uncle John
compares that to taking a perpetual warm bath."

"It is wrong; but, my dear Jack, life is a succession of compromises,
especially domestic life, and considering the practical difficulties in
the way of open hickory fires in all the forty or more rooms, we must
be content with the artificially warmed air for every day use and
consider radiated heat from wood fires, coal grates, or sunshine, as
luxuries."

"Certainly; it would be a pity to make all luxuries impossible just
because we happen to own a castle in Spain. Aren't you afraid our court
will be dreadfully hot in summer, shut in by four brick walls?"

"By no means; it will be particularly cool. If we like we can have a
great awning to draw over it in the hottest weather, and wide halls
will allow a perfect circulation of air throughout the whole structure.
In addition to this, on the highest part of the roof there will be a
space fitted for an outdoor sitting room, sheltered when necessary by
awnings and screens, but most delightful on hot summer evenings."

"Oh, yes, I see. A sort of copy of the old Egyptian houses."

"No, not a sort of a copy of anything, but a simple application of
common sense. In the evening when there is a breeze from any direction,
the highest part of the house will be the coolest."

"I thought it was to be a two-story house. How can one part be higher
than the rest?"

"I didn't say it was to be all of the same height. Some rooms will be
much higher than others because they will be larger. If a room is to be
of agreeable proportions, the height must be determined by the size. It
may be best to make the north side three stories high and the south
only one; that would give more sunlight on the north wall of the court
and make the average two stories."

"Nothing like keeping up the average. But aren't forty rooms with all
the closets and storerooms, and stairways and halls, and bays and
oriels and dungeons going to make a large house for one family? Can't
we work the same idea on a smaller scale?"

"Of course, but that is not too large for a comfortable home for a
family of moderate size. Count your fingers and try it. To begin at
that end of the establishment, we want a scullery, a kitchen, and a
servants' dining room; we want a breakfast room, and a large dining
room for the family, and the dining room, by the way, should be one of
the largest rooms in the house, say twenty-one or two feet by thirty
six or forty; we want a parlor, a drawing room, a library, a
billiard room and a picture gallery; a music room and ball room, these
being, of course, in one, but as large as two ordinary rooms; then we
want a nursery, a workroom for the children, a sick room and a sewing
room, an office and a smoking room, and one or two extra sitting or
reception rooms. Each member of the family should have a private
sitting room and bedroom, with dressing room and bath for each suite.
That, you see, would just about suit a family of ten people without
counting the servants."

[Illustration: A CASTLE IN SPAIN.]

"Have you made any calculation Jill, dear, as to how many people there
are at present in the United States who could manage to scrape along
with thirty-nine rooms instead of forty?"

"Why should I? This is a castle in Spain. We have plenty of money,
plenty of room, plenty of time. Our only anxiety is lest there should
be a lack of brains to make good use of our room and time and money."

"And what shall we build it of, jasper, sapphire and chalcedony?"

"No, burned clay and granite, steel, copper and glass. It shall be
defiant of fire and flood; it shall neither burn up nor rot down."

"One thing more, Jill, when we come to make our wills to which one of
the children shall we bequeath the castle?"

Before Jill could answer the door was hurriedly opened and Bessie
appeared upon the threshold.

"I've just run away from Jim," she began rapidly. "We haven't had a
family quarrel exactly, but we've argued it over and over, and we come
out just as far apart as ever. Finally I told him I would leave it to
you."

"I haven't any idea what it is all about, but did Jim agree to that?"

"I didn't give him a chance to differ. He always agrees to everything
Jill says about building houses But don't interrupt me. The baby may
wake up at any minute and then Jim will be helpless. The truth is he is
dissatisfied with our home."

"Jim, dissatisfied; impossible!"

"Yes, he thinks it's too small."

"He wants more servants, I suppose; several additional children, a lot
more poor relations, and all the various items that go to make up a
well-ordered household."

"No, no; it is the house that is too small."

"Excuse me, you said the home. The house is a very different affair."

"You remember," Bessie continued, "that when it was built ten years ago
Jim thought it was not large enough. Now he is determined to sell it
and build a new one. There are five good rooms besides the closets, and
as there is nobody but Jim and me and the four children and one
servant, we have all the room we need. We have always been perfectly
comfortable, and I can't bear the thought of selling our home."

Here Bessie began to show symptoms of dissolution, but swallowing her
emotion she continued, "If we could build on a room or two as we need
them I wouldn't mind it. But if you advise us to sell this house for
the sake of having another, I'll"--

"We shan't advise any such thing," said Jack, "but it's perfectly
natural for Jim to think you ought to have a larger, more modern
house."

"But I don't want a more modern house," Bessie protested, "if there is
any created thing that I despise it is a 'modern' house, made up of bay
windows and crooked turrets, and shingled balconies, and peaked roofs,
and grotesque little fandangoes of wood and copper and terra cotta,
that have no more dignity or repose, or beauty or homelike appearance,
than a crazy quilt or a Chinese puzzle. They are simply outrageous,
abominable. I would sooner have the children brought up in a reform
school or a house of correction."

"How would you like a colonial house?"

Bessie's indignation had spent itself, and she resumed her ordinary,
but sometimes misleading manner.

"Isn't it a pity we were not all born a hundred years ago, then we
might have had colonial houses. But why should I want to live in an
uncomfortable old curiosity shop when I like my house just as it is?
Our trouble is that Jim wants the house twice as large as it is now and
I want only one more room."

"Bessie," said Jack, in his most fatherly manner, "I am surprised that
two sensible people like you and Jim should fall into such a
distressing controversy over nothing, absolutely nothing. You are
already in perfect accord. Jim says the house is only half large
enough. You say you want one more room. The house is now just
thirty-three feet long and thirty-three feet wide; add a new room
thirty-three feet square; you will have the one extra room, and Jim
will have the house doubled in size. Isn't that right?"

"Yes," said Jill; "It is exactly what I should have suggested if you
had given me a chance. Do you remember the charming room in the old
Florentine palace, where we spent the winter, and how we enjoyed it,
and finally measured it for the benefit of some other Americans who
intended to build a new house as soon as they got home? That was just
thirty-three feet square and eighteen feet high. There was a grand
piano in one corner, in another a group of chairs with bookcases, in
another sofas and chairs and tables scattered about, so that in effect
it was equal to several small rooms. Indeed one of our party described
it in a home letter as a magnificent apartment one hundred feet each
way. It would accommodate several callers, with their different groups
of friends, and it was of course a capital place for music and dancing.
In your new room you will have one corner for the children and another
for yourselves. The Dorcas society can meet at one side while your
little Jack and his friends are playing games at the other. It won't be
many years before Bessie will claim a large section, including one of
the bay windows, for her own use."

"I think I hear the baby crying. Thank you, I'll talk it over with Jim.
Good night."

"Do you think they will do it?" Jack inquired.

"Of course they will; it is by far the most sensible thing. As a family
they are always together and always will be, and one large room will
suit them better than several small ones. Perhaps it will be the best
thing for us, until we can build our castle in Spain. It certainly will
not cost as much as making over and enlarging the rooms we have."

"That is true, and it is my impression that the wisest way to enlarge
an old house is to nail up the windows, seal up the doors and go ahead
with the additions without taking out the nails or breaking the seals
till it is all done; that would save time, money and patience."

"Yes, and more than that," said Jill, "it would preserve the charm of
the old house which grows stronger every year until the loss of the
familiar rooms and their hallowed associations seems like parting with
a dear old friend."














End of Project Gutenberg's The House that Jill Built, by E. C. Gardner



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOUSE THAT JILL BUILT, AFTER JACK'S HAD PROVED A FAILURE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


